4.5 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
Access Management is the process of granting authorized
users the right to use a service, while preventing access to
non-authorized users. It has also been referred to as Rights
Management or Identity Management in different
organizations.
4.5.1 Purpose/goal/objective
Access Management provides the right for users to be able
to use a service or group of services. It is therefore the
execution of policies and actions defined in Security and
Availability Management.
4.5.2 Scope
Access Management is effectively the execution of both
Availability and Information Security Management, in that
it enables the organization to manage the confidentiality,
availability and integrity of the organization’s data and
intellectual property.
Access Management ensures that users are given the right
to use a service, but it does not ensure that this access is
available at all agreed times – this is provided by
Availability Management.
Access Management is a process that is executed by all
Technical and Application Management functions and is
usually not a separate function. However, there is likely to
be a single control point of coordination, usually in IT
Operations Management or on the Service Desk.
Access Management can be initiated by a Service Request
through the Service Desk.
4.5.3 Value to business
Access Management provides the following value:
¦ Controlled access to services ensures that the
organization is able to maintain more effectively the
confidentiality of its information
¦ Employees have the right level of access to execute
their jobs effectively
¦ There is less likelihood of errors being made in data
entry or in the use of a critical service by an unskilled
user (e.g. production control systems)
¦ The ability to audit use of services and to trace the
abuse of services
¦ The ability more easily to revoke access rights when
needed – an important security consideration
¦ May be needed for regulatory compliance (e.g. SOX,
HIPAA, COBIT).
4.5.4 Policies/principles/basic concepts
Access Management is the process that enables users to
use the services that are documented in the Service
Catalogue. It comprises the following basic concepts:
¦ Access refers to the level and extent of a service’s
functionality or data that a user is entitled to use.
¦ Identity refers to the information about them that
distinguishes them as an individual and which verifies
their status within the organization. By definition, the
Identity of a user is unique to that user. (This is
covered in more detail in paragraph 4.5.7.1.)
¦ Rights (also called privileges) refer to the actual
settings whereby a user is provided access to a service
or group of services. Typical rights, or levels of access,
include read, write, execute, change, delete.
¦ Services or service groups. Most users do not use
only one service, and users performing a similar set of
activities will use a similar set of services. Instead of
providing access to each service for each user
separately, it is more efficient to be able to grant each
user – or group of users – access to the whole set of
services that they are entitled to use at the same time.
(This is discussed in more detail in paragraph 4.5.7.2.)
¦ Directory Services refers to a specific type of tool
that is used to manage access and rights. These are
discussed in section 5.8.
4.5.5 Process activities, methods and
techniques
4.5.5.1 Requesting access
Access (or restriction) can be requested using one of any
number of mechanisms, including:
¦ A standard request generated by the Human Resource
system. This is generally done whenever a person is
hired, promoted, transferred or when they leave the
company
¦ A Request for Change
¦ A Service Request submitted via the Request
Fulfilment system
¦ By executing a pre-authorized script or option (e.g.
downloading an application from a staging server as
and when it is needed).
Rules for requesting access are normally documented as
part of the Service Catalogue.
4.5.5.2 Verification
Access Management needs to verify every request for
access to an IT service from two perspectives:
¦ That the user requesting access is who they say
they are
¦ That they have a legitimate requirement for
that service.
The first category is usually achieved by the user providing
their username and password. Depending on the
organization’s security policies, the use of the username
and password are usually accepted as proof that the
person is a legitimate user. However, for more sensitive
services further identification may be required (biometric,
use of an electronic access key or encryption device, etc.).
The second category will require some independent
verification, other than the user’s request. For example:
¦ Notification from Human Resources that the person is
a new employee and requires both a username and
access to a standard set of services
¦ Notification from Human Resources that the user has
been promoted and requires access to additional
resources
¦ Authorization from an appropriate (defined in the
process) manager
¦ Submission of a Service Request (with supporting
evidence) through the Service Desk
¦ Submission of an RFC (with supporting evidence)
through Change Management, or execution of a
pre-defined Standard Change
¦ A policy stating that the user may have access to an
optional service if they need it.
For new services the Change Record should specify which
users or groups of users will have access to the Service.
Access Management will then check to see that all the
users are still valid and automatically provide access as
specified in the RFC.
4.5.5.3 Providing rights
Access Management does not decide who has access to
which IT services. Rather, Access Management executes
the policies and regulations defined during Service
Strategy and Service Design. Access Management enforces
decisions to restrict or provide access, rather than making
the decision.
As soon as a user has been verified, Access Management
will provide that user with rights to use the requested
service. In most cases this will result in a request to every
team or department involved in supporting that service to
take the necessary action. If possible, these tasks should
be automated.
The more roles and groups that exist, the more likely that
Role Conflict will arise. Role Conflict in this context refers
to a situation where two specific roles or groups, if
assigned to a single user, will create issues with separation
of duties or conflict of interest. Examples of this include:
¦ One role requires detailed access, while another role
prevents that access
¦ Two roles allow a user to perform two tasks that
should not be combined (e.g. a contractor can log
their time sheet for a project and then approve all
payment on work for the same project).
Role Conflict can be avoided by careful creation of roles
and groups, but more often they are caused by policies
and decisions made outside of Service Operation – either
by the business or by different project teams working
during Service Design. In each case the conflict must be
documented and escalated to the stakeholders to resolve.
Whenever roles and groups are defined, it is possible that
they could be defined too broadly or too narrowly. There
will always be users who need something slightly different
from the pre-defined roles. In these cases, it is possible to
use standard roles and then add or subtract specific rights
as required – similar to the concept of Baselines and
Variants in Configuration Management (see Service
Transition publication). However, the decision to do this is
not in the hands of individual operational staff members.
Each exception should be coordinated by Access
Management and approved through the originating
process.
Access Management should perform a regular review of
the roles and groups that it has created and manage to
ensure that they are appropriate for the services that IT
delivers and supports – and obsolete or unwanted
roles/groups should be removed.
4.5.5.4 Monitoring identity status
As users work in the organization, their roles change and
so also do their needs to access services. Examples of
changes include:
Job changes. In this case the user will possibly need
access to different or additional services.
¦ Promotions or demotions. The user will probably use
the same set of services, but will need access to
different levels of functionality or data.
¦ Transfers. In this situation, the user may need access
to exactly the same set of services, but in a different
region with different working practices and different
sets of data.
¦ Resignation or death. Access needs to be completely
removed to prevent the username being used as a
security loophole.
¦ Retirement. In many organizations, an employee who
retires may still have access to a limited set of services,
including benefits systems or systems that allow them
to purchase company products at a reduced rate.
¦ Disciplinary action. In some cases the organization
will require a temporary restriction to prevent the user
from accessing some or all of the services that they
would normally have access to. There should be a
feature in the process and tools to do this, rather than
having to delete and reinstate the user’s access rights.
¦ Dismissals. Where an employee or contractor is
dismissed, or where legal action is taken against a
customer (for example for defaulting on payment for
products purchased on the Internet), access should be
revoked immediately. In addition, Access Management,
working together with Information Security
Management, should take active measures to prevent
and detect malicious action against the organization
from that user.
Access Management should understand and document
the typical User Lifecycle for each type of user and use it
to automate the process. Access Management tools should
provide features that enable a user to be moved from one
state to another, or from one group to another, easily and
with an audit trail.
4.5.5.5 Logging and tracking access
Access Management should not only respond to requests.
It is also responsible for ensuring that the rights that they
have provided are being properly used.
In this respect, Access Monitoring and Control must be
included in the monitoring activities of all Technical and
Application Management functions and all Service
Operation processes.
Exceptions should be handled by Incident Management,
possibly using Incident Models specifically designed to
deal with abuse of access rights. It should be noted that
the visibility of such actions should be restricted. Making
this information available to all who have access to the
Incident Management system will expose vulnerabilities.
Information Security Management plays a vital role in
detecting unauthorized access and comparing it with the
rights that were provided by Access Management. This will
require Access Management involvement in defining the
parameters for use in Intrusion Detection tools.
Access Management may also be required to provide a
record of access for specific Services during forensic
investigations. If a user is suspected of breaches of policy,
inappropriate use of resources, or fraudulent use of data,
Access Management may be required to provide evidence
of dates, times and even content of that user’s access to
specific Services. This is normally provided by the
Operational staff of that service, but working as part of the
Access Management process.
4.5.5.6 Removing or restricting rights
Just as Access Management provides rights to use a
Service, it is also responsible for revoking those rights.
Again, this is not a decision that it makes on its own.
Rather, it will execute the decisions and policies made
during Service Strategy and Design and also decisions
made by managers in the organization.
Removing access is usually done in the following
circumstances:
¦ Death
¦ Resignation
¦ Dismissal
¦ When the user has changed roles and no longer
requires access to the service
¦ Transfer or travel to an area where different regional
access applies.
In other cases it is not necessary to remove access, but
just to provide tighter restrictions. These could include
reducing the level, time or duration of access. Situations
in which access should be restricted include:
¦ When the user has changed roles or been demoted
and no longer requires the same level of access
¦ When the user is under investigation, but still requires
access to basic services, such as e-mail. In this case
their e-mail may be subject to additional scanning
(but this would need to be handled very carefully
and in full accordance with the organization’s
security policy)
¦ When a user is away from the organization on
temporary assignment and will not require access to
that service for some time.
4.5.6 Triggers, input and output/interprocess interfaces
Access Management is triggered by a request for a user or
users to access a service or group of services. This could
originate from any of the following:
¦ An RFC. This is most frequently used for large-scale
service introductions or upgrades where the rights of a
significant number of users need to be updated as
part of the project.
¦ A Service Request. This is usually initiated through
the Service Desk, or directly into the Request
Fulfilment system, and executed by the relevant
Technical or Application Management teams.
¦ A request from the appropriate Human Resources
Management personnel (which should be channelled
via the Service Desk). This is usually generated as part
of the process for hiring, promoting, relocating and
termination or retirement.
¦ A request from the manager of a department, who
could be performing an HR role, or who could have
made a decision to start using a service for the first
time.
Access Management should be linked to the Human
Resource processes to verify the user’s identify as well as
to ensure that they are entitled to the services being
requested.
Information Security Management is a key driver for Access
Management as it will provide the security and data
protection policies and tools needed to execute Access
Management.
Change Management plays an important role as the
means to control the actual requests for access. This is
because any request for access to a service is a change,
although it is usually processed as a Standard Change or
Service Request (possibly using a model) once the criteria
for access have been agreed through SLM.
SLM maintains the agreements for access to each service.
This will include the criteria for who is entitled to access
each service, what the cost of that access will be, if
appropriate and what level of access will be granted to
different types of user (e.g. managers or staff).
There is also a strong relationship between Access
Management and Configuration Management. The CMS
can be used for data storage and interrogated to
determine current access details.
4.5.7 Information Management
4.5.7.1 Identity
The identity of a user is the information about them that
distinguishes them as an individual and which verifies
their status within the organization. By definition, the
identity of a user is unique to that user. Since there are
cases where two users share a common piece of
information (e.g. they have the same name), identity is
usually established using more than one piece of
information, for example:
¦ Name
¦ Address
¦ Contact details, e.g. telephone, e-mail address, etc.
¦ Physical documentation, e.g. driver’s licence, passport,
marriage certificate, etc.
¦ Numbers that refer to a document or an entry in a
database, e.g. employee number, tax number,
government identity number, driver’s licence number,
etc.
¦ Biometric information, e.g. fingerprints, retinal images,
voice recognition patterns, DNA, etc.
¦ Expiration date (if relevant).
A user identity is provided to anyone with a legitimate
requirement to access IT services or organizational
information. These could include:
¦ Employees
¦ Contractors
¦ Vendor staff (e.g. account managers, support
personnel, etc.)
¦ Customers (especially when purchasing products or
services over the Internet).
Most organizations will verify a user’s identity before they
join the organization by requesting a subset of the above
information. The more secure the organization, the more
types of information are required and the more thoroughly
they are checked.
Many organizations will be faced with the need to provide
access rights to temporary or occasional staff or
contractors/suppliers. The management of access to such
personnel often proves problematic – closing access after
use is often as difficult to manage, or more so, than
providing access initially. Well-defined procedures
between IT and HR should be established that include failsafe checks that ensure access rights are removed
immediately they are no longer justified or required.
When a user is granted access to an application, it should
already have been established by the organization (usually
the Human Resources or Security Department) that the
user is who they say they are.
At this point, all that information is filed and the file is
associated with a corporate identity, usually an employee
or contractor number and an identity that can be used to
access corporate resources and information, usually a user
identity or ‘username’ and an associated password.
4.5.7.2 Users, groups, roles and service groups
While each user has an individual identity, and each IT
service can be seen as an entity in its own right, it is often
helpful to group them together so that they can be
managed more easily. Sometimes the terms ‘user profile’
or ‘user template’ or ‘user role’ are used to describe this
type of grouping.
Most organizations have a standard set of services for all
individual users, regardless of their position or job
(excluding customers – who do not have any visibility to
internal services and processes). These will include services
such as messaging, office automation, Desktop Support,
telephony, etc. New users are automatically provided with
rights to use these services.
However, most users also have some specialized role that
they perform. For example, in addition to the standard
services, the user also performs a Marketing Management
role, which requires that they have access to some
specialized marketing and financial modelling tools
and data.
Some groups may have unique requirements – such as
field or home workers who may have to dial in or use
Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections, with security
implications that may have to be more tightly managed.
To make it easier for Access Management to provide the
appropriate rights, it uses a catalogue of all the roles in
the organization and which services support each role.
This catalogue of roles should be compiled and
maintained by Access Management in conjunction with
HR and will often be automated in the Directory Services
tools (see section 5.8).
In addition to playing different roles, users may also
belong to different groups. For example, all contractors are
required to log their timesheets in a dedicated Time Card
System, which is not used by employees. Access
Management will assess all the roles that a user plays as
well as the groups that they belong to and ensure that
they provide rights to use all associated services.
Note: All data held on users will be subject to data
protection legislation (this exists in most geographic
locations in some form or other) so should be handled
and protected as part of the organization’s security
procedures.
4.5.8 Metrics
Metrics that can be used to measure the efficiency and
effectiveness of Access Management include:
¦ Number of requests for access (Service Request, RFC,
etc.)
¦ Instances of access granted, by service, user,
department, etc.
¦ Instances of access granted by department or
individual granting rights
¦ Number of incidents requiring a reset of access rights
¦ Number of incidents caused by incorrect access
settings.
4.5.9 Challenges, Critical Success Factors
and risks
Conditions for successful Access Management include:
¦ The ability to verify the identity of a user (that the
person is who they say they are)
¦ The ability to verify the identity of the approving
person or body
¦ The ability to verify that a user qualifies for access to a
specific service
¦ The ability to link multiple access rights to an
individual user
¦ The ability to determine the status of the user at any
time (e.g. to determine whether they are still
employees of the organization when they log on to a
system)
¦ The ability to manage changes to a user’s access
requirements
¦ The ability to restrict access rights to unauthorized
users
¦ A database of all users and the rights that they have
been granted.