4 Service Operation processes
The processes listed in paragraph 2.4.5 are discussed in
detail in this chapter. As a reference, the overall structure
is briefly described here and then each of the processes is
described in more detail later in the chapter. Please note
that the roles for each process and the tools used for each
process are described in Chapters 6 and 7 respectively.
¦ Event Management is the process that monitors all
events that occur through the IT infrastructure to allow
for normal operation and also to detect and escalate
exception conditions.
¦ Incident Management concentrates on restoring the
service to users as quickly as possible, in order to
minimize business impact.
¦ Problem Management involves root-cause analysis to
determine and resolve the cause of events and
incidents, proactive activities to detect and prevent
future problems/incidents and a Known Error subprocess to allow quicker diagnosis and resolution if
further incidents do occur.
NOTE: Without this distinction between incidents and
problems, and keeping separate Incident and Problem
Records, there is a danger that either:
? Incidents will be closed too early in the overall
support cycle and there will be no actions taken to
prevent recurrence – so the same incidents will
have to be fixed over and over again, or
? Incidents will be kept open so that root cause
analysis can be done and visibility will be lost of
when the user’s service was actually restored – so
SLA targets may not be met even though the
service has been restored within users’
expectations. This often results in a large number
of open incidents, many of which will never be
closed unless a periodic ‘purge’ is undertaken. This
can be very demotivating and can prevent effective
visibility of current issues.
¦ Request Fulfilment involves the management of
customer or user requests that are not generated as
an incident from an unexpected service delay or
disruption. Some organizations may choose to handle
such requests as a ‘category’ of incidents and manage
the information through an Incident Management
system – but others may choose (because of high
volumes or business priority of such requests) to
facilitate the provision of Request Fulfilment
capabilities separately via the Request Fulfilment
process. It has become popular practice to use a
formal Request Fulfilment process to manage
customer and user requests for all types of requests
which include facilities, moves and supplies as well as
those specific to IT services. These requests are not
generally tied to the same SLA measures and
separating the records and the process flow is
emerging as best practice in many organizations.
¦ Access Management: this is the process of granting
authorized users the right to use a service, while
restricting access to non-authorized users. It is based
on being able accurately to identify authorized users
and then manage their ability to access services as
required during different stages of their human
resources (HR) or contractual lifecycle. Access
Management has also been called Identity or Rights
Management in some organizations.
In addition, there are several other processes that will be
executed or supported during Service Operation, but
which are driven during other phases of the Service
Management Lifecycle. The operational aspects of these
processes will be discussed in the final part of this chapter
and include:
¦ Change Management, a major process which should
be closely linked to Configuration Management and
Release Management. These topics are primarily
covered in the Service Transition publication.
¦ Capacity and Availability Management, the operational
aspects of which are covered in this publication, but
which are covered in more detail in the Service Design
publication.
¦ Financial Management, which is covered in the Service
Strategy publication.
¦ Knowledge Management, which is covered in the
Service Transition publication.
¦ IT Service Continuity, which is covered in the Service
Design publication.
¦ Service Reporting and Measurement, which are
covered in the Continual Service Improvement
publication.