4.3 REQUEST FULFILMENT
The term ‘Service Request’ is used as a generic description
for many varying types of demands that are placed upon
the IT Department by the users. Many of these are actually
small changes – low risk, frequently occurring, low cost,
etc. (e.g. a request to change a password, a request to
install an additional software application onto a particular
workstation, a request to relocate some items of desktop
equipment) or maybe just a question requesting
information – but their scale and frequent, low-risk nature
means that they are better handled by a separate process,
rather than being allowed to congest and obstruct the
normal Incident and Change Management processes.
4.3.1 Purpose/goal/objective
Request Fulfilment is the processes of dealing with Service
Requests from the users. The objectives of the Request
Fulfilment process include:
¦ To provide a channel for users to request and receive
standard services for which a pre-defined approval and
qualification process exists
¦ To provide information to users and customers about
the availability of services and the procedure for
obtaining them
¦ To source and deliver the components of requested
standard services (e.g. licences and software media)
¦ To assist with general information, complaints or
comments.
4.3.2 Scope
The process needed to fulfil a request will vary depending
upon exactly what is being requested – but can usually be
broken down into a set of activities that have to be
performed. Some organizations will be comfortable to let
the Service Requests be handled through their Incident
Management processes (and tools) – with Service Requests
being handled as a particular type of ‘incident’ (using a
high-level categorization system to identify those
‘incidents’ that are in fact Service Requests).
Note, however, that there is a significant difference here –
an incident is usually an unplanned event whereas a
Service Request is usually something that can and should
be planned!
Therefore, in an organization where large numbers of
Service Requests have to be handled, and where the
actions to be taken to fulfil those requests are very varied
or specialized, it may be appropriate to handle Service
Requests as a completely separate work stream – and to
record and manage them as a separate record type.
This may be particularly appropriate if the organization
has chosen to widen the scope of the Service Desk to
expand upon just IT-related issues and use the desk as a
focal point for other types or request for service – for
example, a request to service a photocopier or even going
so far as to include, for example, building management
issues, such as a need to replace a light fitment or repair a
leak in the plumbing.
Note: It will ultimately be up to each organization to
decide and document which request it will handle
through the Request Fulfilment process and which others
will have to go through more formal Change
Management. There will always be grey areas which
prevent generic guidance from being usefully prescribed.
4.3.3 Value to business
The value of Request Fulfilment is to provide quick and
effective access to standard services which business staff
can use to improve their productivity or the quality of
business services and products.
Request Fulfilment effectively reduces the bureaucracy
involved in requesting and receiving access to existing or
new services, thus also reducing the cost of providing
these services. Centralizing fulfilment also increases the
level of control over these services. This in turn can help
reduce costs through centralized negotiation with
suppliers, and can also help to reduce the cost of support.
4.3.4 Policies/principles/basic concepts
Many Service Requests will be frequently recurring, so a
predefined process flow (a model) can be devised to
include the stages needed to fulfil the request, the
individuals or support groups involved, target timescales
and escalation paths. Service Requests will usually be
satisfied by implementing a Standard Change (see the
Service Transition publication for further details on
Standard Changes). The ownership of Service Requests
resides with the Service Desk, which monitors, escalates,
dispatches and often fulfils the user request.
4.3.4.1 Request Models
Some Service Requests will occur frequently and will
require handling in a consistent manner in order to meet
agreed service levels. To assist this, many organizations will
wish to create pre-defined Request Models (which typically
include some form of pre-approval by Change
Management). This is similar in concept to the idea of
Incident Models already described in paragraph 4.2.4.2,
but applied to Service Requests.
4.3.5 Process activities, methods and
techniques
4.3.5.1 Menu selection
Request Fulfilment offers great opportunities for self-help
practices where users can generate a Service Request
using technology that links into Service Management
tools. Ideally, users should be offered a ‘menu’-type
selection via a web interface, so that they can select and
input details of Service Requests from a pre-defined list –
appropriate expectations can be set by giving target
delivery and/or implementation targets/dates (in line with
SLA targets). Where organizations are offering a self-help IT
support capability to the users, it would make sense to
combine this with a Request Fulfilment system as
described.
Specialist web tools to offer this type of ‘shopping basket’
experience can be used together with interfaces directly to
the back-end integrated ITSM tools, or other more general
business process automation or Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) tools that may be used for management of
the Request Fulfilment activities.
4.3.5.2 Financial approval
One important extra step that is likely to be needed when
dealing with a service request is that of financial approval.
Most requests will have some form of financial
implications, regardless of the type of commercial
arrangements in place. The cost of fulfilling the request
must first be established. It may be possible to agree fixed
prices for ‘standard’ requests – and prior approval for such
requests may be given as part of the organization’s overall
annual financial management. In all other cases, an
estimate of the cost must be produced and submitted to
the user for financial approval (the user may need to seek
approval up their management/financial chain). If approval
is given, in addition to fulfilling the request, the process
must also include charging (billing or cross-charging) for
the work done – if charging is in place.
4.3.5.3 Other approval
In some cases further approval may be needed – such as
compliance-related or wider business approval. Request
Fulfilment must have the ability to define and check such
approvals where needed.
4.3.5.4 Fulfilment
The actual fulfilment activity will depend upon the nature
of the Service Request. Some simpler requests may be
completed by the Service Desk, acting as first-line support,
while others will have to be forwarded to specialist groups
and/or suppliers for fulfilment.
Some organizations may have specialist fulfilment groups
(to ‘pick, pack and dispatch’) – or may have outsourced
some fulfilment activities to a third-party supplier(s). The
Service Desk should monitor and chase progress and keep
users informed throughout, regardless of the actual
fulfilment source.
4.3.5.5 Closure
When the Service Request has been fulfilled it must be
referred back to the Service Desk for closure. The Service
Desk should go through the same closure process as
described earlier in paragraph 4.2.5.9 – checking that the
user is satisfied with the outcome.
4.3.6 Triggers, input and output/interprocess interfaces
Most requests will be triggered through either a user
calling the Service Desk or a user completing some form
of self-help web-based input screen to make their request.
The latter will often involve a selection from a portfolio of
available request types.
The primary interfaces with Request Fulfilment include:
¦ Service Desk/Incident Management: Many Service
Requests may come in via the Service Desk and may
be initially handled through the Incident Management
process. Some organizations may choose that all
requests are handled via this route – but others may
choose to have a separate process, for reasons already
discussed earlier in this chapter.
¦ A strong link is also needed between Request
Fulfilment, Release, Asset and Configuration
Management – as some requests will be for the
deployment of new or upgraded components that can
be automatically deployed. In such cases the ‘release’
can be pre-defined, built and tested but only
deployed upon request by those who want the
‘release’. Upon deployment, the CMS will have to be
updated to reflect the change. Where appropriate,
software licence checks/updates will also be necessary.
Where appropriate, it will be necessary to relate IT-related
Service Requests to any incidents or problems that have
initiated the need for the request (as would be the case
for any other type of change).
4.3.7 Information Management
Request Fulfilment is dependent on information from the
following sources:
¦ The Service Requests will contain information about:
? What service is being requested
? Who requested and authorized the service
? Which process will be used to fulfil the request
? To whom it was assigned to and what action
was taken
The date and time when the request was logged
as well as the date and time of all actions taken
? Closure details.
¦ Requests for Change: In some cases the Request
Fulfilment process will be initiated by an RFC. This is
typical where the Service Request relates to a CI
¦ The Service Portfolio, to enable the scope of agreed
Service Request to be identified
¦ Security Policies will prescribe any controls to be
executed or adhered to when providing the service,
e.g. ensuring that the requester is authorized to access
the service, or that the software is licensed.
4.3.8 Metrics
The metrics needed to judge the effectiveness and
efficiency of Request Fulfilment will include the following
(each metric will need to be broken down by request
type, within the period):
¦ The total number of Service Requests (as a control
measure)
¦ Breakdown of service requests at each stage (e.g.
logged, WIP, closed, etc.)
¦ The size of current backlog of outstanding Service
Requests
¦ The mean elapsed time for handling each type of
Service Request
¦ The number and percentage of Service Requests
completed within agreed target times
¦ The average cost per type of Service Request
¦ Level of client satisfaction with the handling of Service
Requests (as measured in some form of satisfaction
survey).
4.3.9 Challenges, Critical Success Factors
and risks
4.3.9.1 Challenges
The following challenges will be faced when introducing
Request Fulfilment:
¦ Clearly defining and documenting the type of requests
that will be handled within the Request Fulfilment
process (and those that will either go through the
Service Desk and be handled as incidents or those
that will need to go through formal Change
Management) – so that all parties are absolutely clear
on the scope.
¦ Establishing self-help front-end capabilities that allow
the users to interface successfully with the Request
Fulfilment process.
4.3.9.2 Critical Success Factors
Request Fulfilment depends on the following Critical
Success Factors:
¦ Agreement of what services will be standardized and
who is authorized to request them. The cost of these
services must also be agreed. This may be done as
part of the SLM process. Any variances of the services
must also be defined.
¦ Publication of the services to users as part of the
Service Catalogue. It is important that this part of the
Service Catalogue must be easily accessed, perhaps on
the Intranet, and should be recognized as the first
source of information for users seeking access to a
service.
¦ Definition of a standard fulfilment procedure for each
of the services being requested. This includes all
procurement policies and the ability to generate
purchase orders and work orders
¦ A single point of contact which can be used to
request the service. This is often provided by the
Service Desk or through an Intranet request, but could
be through an automated request directly into the
Request Fulfilment or procurement system.
¦ Self-service tools needed to provide a front-end
interface to the users. It is essential that these
integrate with the back-end fulfilment tools, often
managed through Incident or Change Management.
4.3.9.3 Risks
Risks that may be encountered with Request Fulfilment
include:
¦ Poorly defined scope, where people are unclear about
exactly what the process is expected to handle
¦ Poorly designed or implemented user interfaces so
that users have difficulty raising the requests that
they need
¦ Badly designed or operated back-end fulfilment
processes that are incapable of dealing with the
volume or nature of the requests being made
¦ Inadequate monitoring capabilities so that accurate
metrics cannot be gathered.