4.6 OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES OF
PROCESSES COVERED IN OTHER LIFECYCLE
PHASES
4.6.1 Change Management
Change Management is primarily covered in the Service
Transition publication, but there are some aspects of
Change Management which Service Operation staff will be
involved with on a day-to-day basis. These include:
¦ Raising and submitting RFCs as needed to address
Service Operation issues
¦ Participating in CAB or CAB/EC meetings to ensure
that Service Operation risks, issues and views are taken
into account
¦ Implementing changes as directed by Change
Management where they involve Service Operation
component or services
¦ Backing out changes as directed by Change
Management where they involve Service Operation
component or services
¦ Helping define and maintain change models relating
to Service Operation components or services
¦ Receiving change schedules and ensuring that all
Service Operation staff are made aware of and
prepared for all relevant changes
¦ Using the Change Management process for standard,
operational-type changes.
4.6.2 Configuration Management
Configuration Management is primarily covered in the
Service Transition publication, but there are some aspects
of Configuration Management which Service Operation
staff will be involved with on a day-to-day basis. These
include:
¦ Informing Configuration Management of any
discrepancies found between any CIs and the CMS
¦ Making any amendments necessary to correct any
discrepancies, under the authority of Configuration
Management, where they involve any Service
Operation components or services.
Responsibility for updating the CMS remains with
Configuration Management, but in some cases Operations
staff might be asked, under the direction of Configuration
Management, to update relationships, or even to add new
CIs or mark CIs as ‘disposed’ in the CMS, if these updates
are related to operational activities actually performed by
Operations staff.
4.6.3 Release and Deployment Management
Release and Deployment Management is primarily covered
in the Service Transition publication, but there are some
aspects of this process which Service Operation staff will
be involved with on a day-to-day basis. These may
include:
¦ Actual implementation actions regarding the
deployment of new releases, under the direction of
Release and Deployment Management, where they
relate to Service Operation components or services
¦ Participation in the planning stages of major new
releases to advise on Service Operation issues
¦ The physical handling of CIs from/to the DML as
required to fulfil their operational roles – while
adhering to relevant Release and Deployment
Management procedures, such as ensure that all items
are properly booked out and back in.
4.6.4 Capacity Management
Capacity Management should operate at three levels:
Business Capacity Management, Service Capacity
Management and Component Capacity Management.
¦ Business Capacity Management involves working
with the business to plan and anticipate both longerterm strategic issues and shorter-term tactical
initiatives that are likely to have an impact on IT
capacity.
¦ Service Capacity Management is about
understanding the characteristics of each of the IT
services, and then the demands that different types
of users or transactions have on the underlying
infrastructure – and how these vary over time and
might be impacted by business change.
¦ Component Capacity Management involves
understanding the performance characteristics and
capabilities and current utilization levels of all the
technical components (CIs) that make up the IT
Infrastructure, and predicting the impact of any
changes or trends.
Many of these activities are of a strategic or longer-term
planning nature and are covered in the Service Strategy,
Service Design and Service Transition publications.
However, there are a number of operational Capacity
Management activities that must be performed on a
regular ongoing basis as part of Service Operation. These
include the following.
4.6.4.1 Capacity and Performance Monitoring
All components of the IT Infrastructure should be
continually monitored (in conjunction with Event
Management) so that any potential problems or trends
can be identified before failures or performance
degradation occurs. Ideally, such monitoring should be
automated and thresholds should be set so that exception
alerts are raised in good time to allow appropriate
avoiding or recovery action to be taken before adverse
impact occurs.
The components and elements to be monitored will vary
depending upon the infrastructure in use, but will typically
include:
¦ CPU utilization (overall and broken down by
system/service usage)
¦ Memory utilization
¦ IO rates (physical and buffer) and device utilization
¦ Queue length (maximum and average)
¦ File store utilization (disks, partitions, segments)
¦ Applications (throughput rates, failure rates)
¦ Databases (utilization, record locks, indexing,
contention)
¦ Network transaction rates, error and retry rates
¦ Transaction response time
¦ Batch duration profiles
¦ Internet/intranet site/page hit rates
¦ Internet response times (external and internal to
firewalls)
¦ Number of system/application log-ons and concurrent
users
¦ Number of network nodes in use, and utilization
levels.
There are different kinds of monitoring tools needed to
collect and interpret data at each level. For example, some
tools will allow performance of business transactions to be
monitored, while others will monitor CI behaviour.
Capacity Management must set up and calibrate alarm
thresholds (where necessary in conjunction with Event
Management, as it is often Event Monitoring tools that
may be used) so that the correct alert levels are set and
that any filtering is established as necessary so that only
meaningful events are raised. Without such filtering it is
possible that ‘information only’ alerts can obscure more
significant alerts that require immediate attention. In
addition, it is possible for serious failures to cause ‘alert
storms’ due to very high volumes of repeat alerts, which
again must be filtered so that the most meaningful
messages are not obscured.
It may be appropriate to use external, third-party,
monitoring capabilities for some CIs or components of
the IT Infrastructure (e.g. key internet sites/pages).
Capacity Management should be involved in helping
specify and select any such monitoring capabilities and
in integrating the results or any alerts with other
monitoring and handling systems.
Capacity Management must work with all appropriate
support groups to make decisions on where alarms are
routed and on escalation paths and timescales. Alerts
should be logged to the Service Desk as well as to
appropriate support staff, so that appropriate Incident
Records can be raised so a permanent record of the event
exists – and Service Desk staff have a view of how well the
support group(s) are dealing with the fault and can
intervene if necessary.
Manufacturers’ claimed performance capabilities and
agreed service level targets, together with actual historical
monitored performance and capacity data, should be used
to set alert levels. This may need to be an iterative process
initially, performing some trial-and-error adjustments until
the correct levels are achieved.
Note: Capacity Management may have to become
involved in the capacity requirements and capabilities of IT
Service Management. Whether the organization has
enough Service Desk staff to handle the rate of incidents;
whether the CAB structure can handle the number of
changes it is being asked to review and approve; whether
support tools can handle the volume of data being
gathered are Capacity Management issues, which the
Capacity Management team may be asked to help
investigate and answer.
4.6.4.2 Handling capacity- or performancerelated incidents
If an alert is triggered, or an incident is raised at the
Service Desk, caused by a current or ongoing Capacity or
Performance Management problem, Capacity Management
must become involved to identify the cause and find a
resolution. Working together with appropriate technical
support groups, and alongside Problem Management, all
necessary investigations must be performed to detect
exactly what has gone wrong and what is needed to
correct the situation.
It may be necessary to switch to more detailed monitoring
during the investigation phase to determine the exact
cause. Monitoring is often set at a ‘background’ level
during normal circumstances due to the large amount of
data that can be generated and to avoid placing too high
a burden on the IT Infrastructure – but when specific
difficulties are being investigated more detailed
monitoring may be needed to pinpoint the exact cause.
When a solution, or potential solution, has been found,
any changes necessary to resolve the problem must be
approved via formal Change Management prior to
implementation. If the fault is causing serious disruption
and an urgent resolution is needed, the urgent change
process should be used. It is very important that no
‘tuning’ takes place without submission through Change
Management, as even apparently small adjustments can
often have very large cumulative effects – sometimes
across the entire IT Infrastructure.
4.6.4.3 Capacity and performance trends
Capacity Management has a role to play in identifying any
capacity or performance trends as they become
discernible. Further details of actions needed to address
such trends are included in the Continual Service
Improvement publication.
4.6.4.4 Storage of Capacity Management data
Large amounts of data are usually generated through
capacity and performance monitoring. Monitoring of
meters and tables of just a few Kbytes each can quickly
grown into huge files if many components are being
monitored at relatively short intervals. Another problem
with very short-term monitoring is that it is not possible to
gather meaningful information without looking over a
longer period. For example, a single snapshot of a CPU
will show the device to be either ‘busy’ or ‘idle’ – but a
summary over, say, a 5-minute period will show the
average utilization level over that period, which is a much
more meaningful measure of whether the device is able to
work comfortably, or whether potential performance
problems are likely to occur.
In any organization it is likely that the monitoring tools
used will vary greatly – with a combination of systemspecific tools, many of them part of the basic operating
system, and specialist monitoring tools being used. In
order to coordinate the data being generated and allow
the retention of meaningful data for analysis and trending
purposes, some form of central repository for holding
this summary data is needed: a Capacity Management
Information System (CMIS).
The format, location and design of such a database should
be planned and implemented in advance – see the Service
Design publication for further details – but there will be
some operational aspects to handle, such as database
housekeeping and backups.
4.6.4.5 Demand Management
Demand Management is the name given to a number of
techniques that can be used to modify demand for a
particular resource or service. Some techniques for
Demand Management can be planned in advance – and
these are covered in more detail in the Service Design
publication. However, there are other aspects of Demand
Management that are of a more operational nature,
requiring shorter-term action.
If, for example, the performance of a particular service is
causing concern, and short-term restrictions on
concurrency of users are needed to allow performance
improvements for a smaller restricted group, then Service
Operation functions will have to take action to implement
such restrictions – usually accompanied by concurrent
action to implement the logging-out of users who have
been inactive for an agreed period of time to free up
resources for others.
4.6.4.6 Workload Management
There may be occasions when optimization of
infrastructure resources is needed to maintain or improve
performance or throughput. This can often be done
through Workload Management, which is a generic term
to cover such actions as:
¦ Rescheduling a particular service or workload to run at
a different time of day, or day of the week etc.
(usually away from peak-times to off-peak windows) –
which will often mean having to make adjustments to
job-scheduling software.
¦ Moving a service or workload from one location or set
of CIs to another – often to balance utilization or
traffic.
¦ Technical Virtualization: setting up and using
virtualization systems to allow movement of
processing around the infrastructure to give better
performance/resilience in a dynamic fashion.
¦ Limiting or moving demand for resources through
Demand Management techniques (see above and also
the Service Design publication).
It will only be possible to manage workloads effectively if
a good understanding exists of which workloads will run
at what time and how much resource utilization each
workload places upon the IT Infrastructure. Diligent
monitoring and analysis of workloads is therefore needed
on an ongoing operational basis.
4.6.4.7 Modelling and applications sizing
Modelling and/or sizing of new services and/or
applications must, where appropriate, be done during the
planning and transition phases – see the Service Design
and Service Transition publications. However, the Service
Operation functions have a role to play in evaluating the
accuracy of the predictions and feeding back any issues or
discrepancies.
4.6.4.8 Capacity Planning
During Service Design and Service Transition, the capacity
requirements of IT services are calculated. A forwardlooking capacity plan should be maintained and regularly
updated and Service Operation will have a role to play in
this. Such a plan should look forward up to two years or
more, but should be reviewed regularly every three to 12
months, depending upon volatility and resources available.
The plan should be linked to the organization’s financial
planning cycle, so that any required expenditure for
infrastructure upgrades, enhancements or additions can be
included in budget estimates and approved in advance.
The plan should predict the future but must also examine
and report upon previous predictions, particularly to give
some confidence in further predictions. Where any
discrepancies have been encountered, these should be
explained and future remedial action described.
The Capacity Plan might typically cover:
¦ Current performance and utilization details, with
recent trends for all key CIs, including
? Backbone networks
? LANs
? Mainframes (if still used)
? Key servers
? Main data storage devices
? Selected (representative) desktop and laptop
equipment
? Key websites
? Key databases
? Key applications
? Operational capacity – electricity, floor space,
environmental capacity (air condition), floor
weighting, heat generation and output, electrical
and water demand and supply etc.
? Magnetic media.
¦ Estimated performance and utilization for all such CIs
during the planning period (e.g. the next three
months)
¦ Comparative data with previous estimates – to allow
confidence in future estimates to be judged
¦ Reports on any specific capacity difficulties
encountered in the past period, with details of
recovery and preventive actions taken for the future
¦ Details of any required upgrades or procurements
needed and planned for the future, with indicative
costs and timescales.
¦ Any potential capacity risks that are likely – with
suggested countermeasures should they arise.
4.6.5 Availability Management
During Service Design and Service Transition, IT services
are designed for availability and recovery. Service
Operation is responsible for actually making the IT service
available to the specified users at the required time and at
the agreed levels.
During Service Operation the IT teams and users are in the
best position to detect whether services actually meet the
agreed requirements and whether the design of these
services is effective.
What seems like a good idea during the Design phase
may not actually be practical or optimal. The experience of
the users and operational functions makes them a primary
input into the ongoing improvement of existing services
and the design.
However, there are a number of challenges with gaining
access to this knowledge:
¦ Most of the experiences of the operational teams and
users are either informal, or spread across multiple
sources.
¦ The process for collecting and collating this data
needs to be formalized.
¦ Users and operational staff are usually fully occupied
with their regular activities and tasks and it is very
difficult for them to be involved in regular planning
and design activities. One argument often made here
is that if design is improved, the operational teams
will be less busy resolving problems and will therefore
have more time to be involved in design activities.
However, practice shows that as soon as staff are freed
up, they often become the target of workforce
reduction exercises.
Having said this, there are three key opportunities for
operational staff to be involved in Availability
Improvement, since these are generally viewed as part of
their ongoing responsibility:
¦ Review of maintenance activities. Service Design
will define detailed maintenance schedules and
activities, which are required to keep IT services
functioning at the required level of performance and
availability. Regular comparison of actual maintenance
activities and times with the plans will highlight
potential areas for improvement. One of the sources of
this information is a review of whether Service
Maintenance Objectives were met and, if not, why not.
¦ Major problem reviews. Problems could be the result
of any number of factors, one of which is poor design.
Problem reviews therefore may include opportunities
to identify improvements to the design of IT services,
which will include availability and capacity
improvement.
¦ Involvement in specific initiatives using techniques
such as Service Failure Analysis (SFA), Component
Failure Impact Analysis (CFIA), or Fault Tree Analysis
(FTA) or as members of Technical Observation (TO)
activities – either as part of the follow-up to major
problems or as part of an ongoing Service
Improvement Plan, in collaboration with dedicated
Availability Management staff. These Availability
Management techniques are explained in more detail
in the Service Design publication.
There may be occasions when Operational Staff
themselves need downtime of one or more services to
enable them to conduct their operational or maintenance
activities – which may impact on availability if not
properly scheduled and managed. In such cases they must
liaise with SLM and Availability Management staff – who
will negotiate with the business/users, often using the
Service Desk to perform this role, to agree and schedule
such activities.
4.6.6 Knowledge Management
It is vitally important that all data and information that can
be useful for future Service Operation activities are
properly gathered, stored and assessed. Relevant data,
metrics and information should be passed up on the
management chain and to other Service Lifecycle phases
so that it can feed into the knowledge and wisdom layers
of the organization’s Service Knowledge Management
System, the structures of which have to be defined in
Service Strategy and Service Design and refined in
Continual Service Improvement (see other ITIL publications
in this series).
Key repositories of Service Operation, which have been
frequently mentioned elsewhere, are the CMS and the
KEDB, but this must be widened out to include all of the
Service Operation teams’ and departments’
documentation, such as operations manuals, procedures
manuals, work instructions, etc.
4.6.7 Financial Management for IT services
Service Operation staff must participate in and support the
overall IT budgeting and accounting system – and may
be actively involved in any charging system that may be
in place.
Proper planning is necessary so that capital expenditure
(Capex) and operational expenditure (Opex) budget
estimates can be prepared and agreed in good time to
meet the budgetary cycles.
The Service Operation Manager must also be involved in
regular, at least monthly, reviews of expenditure against
budgets – as part of the ongoing IT budgeting and
accounting process. Any discrepancies must be identified
and necessary adjustments made. All committed
expenditure must go through the organization’s purchase
order system so that commitments can be accrued and
proper checks must be made on all goods received so that
invoices and payments can be correctly authorized – or
discrepancies investigated and rectified.
It should be noted that some proposed cost reductions by
the business may actually increase IT costs, or at least unit
costs. Care should therefore be taken to ensure that IT is
involved in discussing all cost-saving measures and
contribute to overall decisions. Financial Management is
covered in detail in the Service Strategy publication.
4.6.8 IT Service Continuity Management
Service Operation functions are responsible for the testing
and execution of system and service recovery plans as
determined in the IT Service Continuity plans for the
organization. In addition, managers of all Service
Operation functions must be on the Business Continuity
Central Coordination team.
This is discussed in detail in Service Strategy and Service
Design and will not be repeated here, except to indicate
that it is important that Service Operation functions must
be involved in the following areas:
¦ Risk assessment, using its knowledge of the
infrastructure and techniques such as CFIA and access
to information in the CMS to identify single points of
failure or other high-risk situations
¦ Execution of any Risk Management measures that are
agreed, e.g. implementation of countermeasures, or
increased resilience to components of the
infrastructures, etc.
¦ Assistance in writing the actual recovery plans for
systems and services under its control
¦ Participation in testing of the plans (such as
involvement in off-site testing, simulations etc) on an
ongoing basis under the direction of the IT Service
Continuity Manager (ITSCM)
¦ Ongoing maintenance of the plans under the control
of ITSCM and Change Management
¦ Participation in training and awareness campaigns to
ensure that they are able to execute the plans and
understand their roles in a disaster
¦ The Service Desk will play a key role in
communicating with staff, customers and users during
an actual disaster.