4.2 INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
In ITIL terminology, an ‘incident’ is defined as:
An unplanned interruption to an IT service or
reduction in the quality of an IT service. Failure of a
configuration item that has not yet impacted service
is also an incident, for example failure of one disk
from a mirror set.
Incident Management is the process for dealing with
all incidents; this can include failures, questions or
queries reported by the users (usually via a telephone
call to the Service Desk), by technical staff, or
automatically detected and reported by event
monitoring tools.
4.2.1 Purpose/goal/objective
The primary goal of the Incident Management process is
to restore normal service operation as quickly as possible
and minimize the adverse impact on business operations,
thus ensuring that the best possible levels of service
quality and availability are maintained. ‘Normal service
operation’ is defined here as service operation within
SLA limits.
4.2.2 Scope
Incident Management includes any event which disrupts,
or which could disrupt, a service. This includes events
which are communicated directly by users, either through
the Service Desk or through an interface from Event
Management to Incident Management tools.
Incidents can also be reported and/or logged by technical
staff (if, for example, they notice something untoward with
a hardware or network component they may report or log
an incident and refer it to the Service Desk). This does not
mean, however, that all events are incidents. Many classes
of events are not related to disruptions at all, but are
indicators of normal operation or are simply informational
(see section 4.1).
Although both incidents and service requests are reported
to the Service Desk, this does not mean that they are the
same. Service requests do not represent a disruption to
agreed service, but are a way of meeting the customer’s
needs and may be addressing an agreed target in an SLA.
Service requests are dealt with by the Request Fulfilment
process (see section 4.3).
4.2.3 Value to business
The value of Incident Management includes:
¦ The ability to detect and resolve incidents, which
results in lower downtime to the business, which in
turn means higher availability of the service. This
means that the business is able to exploit the
functionality of the service as designed.
¦ The ability to align IT activity to real-time business
priorities. This is because Incident Management
includes the capability to identify business priorities
and dynamically allocate resources as necessary.
¦ The ability to identify potential improvements to
services. This happens as a result of understanding
what constitutes an incident and also from being in
contact with the activities of business operational staff.
¦ The Service Desk can, during its handling of incidents,
identify additional service or training requirements
found in IT or the business.
Incident Management is highly visible to the business, and
it is therefore easier to demonstrate its value than most
areas in Service Operation. For this reason, Incident
Management is often one of the first processes to be
implemented in Service Management projects. The added
benefit of doing this is that Incident Management can be
used to highlight other areas that need attention –
thereby providing a justification for expenditure on
implementing other processes.