Acceptance
::Formal agreement that an IT Service, Process, Plan, or
other Deliverable is complete, accurate, Reliable and meets
its specified Requirements. Acceptance is usually preceded
by Evaluation or Testing and is often required before
proceeding to the next stage of a Project or Process.

Access Management
::(Service Operation) The Process responsible for allowing
Users to make use of IT Services, data, or other Assets.
Access Management helps to protect the Confidentiality,
Integrity and Availability of Assets by ensuring that only
authorized Users are able to access or modify the Assets.
Access Management is sometimes referred to as Rights
Management or Identity Management.

Account Manager
::(Service Strategy) A Role that is very similar to Business
Relationship Manager, but includes more commercial
aspects. Most commonly used when dealing with External
Customers.

Accounting
::(Service Strategy) The Process responsible for identifying
actual Costs of delivering IT Services, comparing these
with budgeted costs, and managing variance from the
Budget.

Accredited
::Officially authorized to carry out a Role. For example, an
Accredited body may be authorized to provide training or
to conduct Audits.

Active Monitoring
::(Service Operation) Monitoring of a Configuration Item or
an IT Service that uses automated regular checks to
discover the current status. See also Passive Monitoring.

Activity
::A set of actions designed to achieve a particular result.
Activities are usually defined as part of Processes or Plans,
and are documented in Procedures.

Agreement
::A Document that describes a formal understanding
between two or more parties. An Agreement is not legally
binding unless it forms part of a Contract. See also Service
Level Agreement, Operational Level Agreement.

Alert
::(Service Operation) A warning that a threshold has been
reached, something has changed, or a Failure has
occurred. Alerts are often created and managed by System
Management tools and are managed by the Event
Management Process.

Application
::Software that provides Functions that are required by an IT
Service. Each Application may be part of more than one IT
Service. An Application runs on one or more Servers or
Clients. See also Application Management, Application
Portfolio.

Application Management
::(Service Design) (Service Operation) The Function
responsible for managing Applications throughout their
Lifecycle.

Application Portfolio
::(Service Design) A database or structured Document used
to manage Applications throughout their Lifecycle. The
Application Portfolio contains key Attributes of all
Applications. The Application Portfolio is sometimes
implemented as part of the Service Portfolio, or as part of
the Configuration Management System.

Application Sizing
::(Service Design) The Activity responsible for understanding
the Resource Requirements needed to support a new
Application, or a major Change to an existing Application.
Application Sizing helps to ensure that the IT Service can
meet its agreed Service Level Targets for Capacity and
Performance.

Architecture
::(Service Design) The structure of a System or IT Service,
including the Relationships of Components to each other
and to the environment they are in. Architecture also
includes the Standards and Guidelines that guide the
design and evolution of the System.

Assessment
::Inspection and analysis to check whether a Standard or set
of Guidelines is being followed, that Records are accurate,
or that Efficiency and Effectiveness targets are being met.
See also Audit.

Asset
::(Service Strategy) Any Resource or Capability. Assets of a
Service Provider including anything that could contribute
to the delivery of a Service. Assets can be one of the
following types: Management, Organization, Process,
Knowledge, People, Information, Applications,
Infrastructure, and Financial Capital.

Asset Management
::(Service Transition) Asset Management is the Process
responsible for tracking and reporting the value and
ownership of financial Assets throughout their Lifecycle.
Asset Management is part of an overall Service Asset and
Configuration Management Process. See also Asset
Register.

Asset Register
::(Service Transition) A list of Assets that includes their
ownership and value. Asset Management maintains the
Asset Register.

Attribute
::(Service Transition) A piece of information about a
Configuration Item. Examples are: name, location, Version
number, and Cost. Attributes of CIs are recorded in the
Configuration Management Database (CMDB). See also
Relationship.

Audit
::Formal inspection and verification to check whether a
Standard or set of Guidelines is being followed, that
Records are accurate, or that Efficiency and Effectiveness
targets are being met. An Audit may be carried out by
internal or external groups.

Automatic Call Distribution (ACD)
::(Service Operation) Use of Information Technology to
direct an incoming telephone call to the most appropriate
person in the shortest possible time. ACD is sometimes
called Automated Call Distribution.

Availability
::(Service Design) Ability of a Configuration Item or IT
Service to perform its agreed Function when required.
Availability is determined by Reliability, Maintainability,
Serviceability, Performance, and Security. Availability is
usually calculated as a percentage. This calculation is often
based on Agreed Service Time and Downtime. It is Best
Practice to calculate Availability using measurements of
the Business output of the IT Service.

Availability Management
::(Service Design) The Process responsible for defining,
analysing, Planning, measuring and improving all aspects
of the Availability of IT services. Availability Management is
responsible for ensuring that all IT Infrastructure, Processes,
Tools, Roles, etc. are appropriate for the agreed Service
Level Targets for Availability.

Availability Plan
::(Service Design) A Plan to ensure that existing and future
Availability Requirements for IT Services can be provided
Cost Effectively.

Back-out
::See Remediation.

Backup
::(Service Design) (Service Operation) Copying data to
protect against loss of Integrity or Availability of the
original.

Balanced Scorecard
::(Continual Service Improvement) A management tool
developed by Drs Robert Kaplan (Harvard Business School)
and David Norton. A Balanced Scorecard enables a
Strategy to be broken down into Key Performance
Indicators. Performance against the KPIs is used to
demonstrate how well the Strategy is being achieved. A
Balanced Scorecard has four major areas, each of which
has a small number of KPIs. The same four areas are
considered at different levels of detail throughout the
Organization.

Baseline
::(Continual Service Improvement) A Benchmark used as a
reference point. For example:
■ An ITSM Baseline can be used as a starting point to
measure the effect of a Service Improvement Plan
■ A Performance Baseline can be used to measure
changes in Performance over the lifetime of an IT
Service
■ A Configuration Management Baseline can be used to
enable the IT Infrastructure to be restored to a known
Configuration if a Change or Release fails.

Benchmark
::(Continual Service Improvement) The recorded state of
something at a specific point in time. A Benchmark can be
created for a Configuration, a Process, or any other set of
data. For example, a benchmark can be used in:
■ Continual Service Improvement, to establish the
current state for managing improvements
■ Capacity Management, to document performance
characteristics during normal operations.
See also Benchmarking, Baseline.

Benchmarking
::(Continual Service Improvement) Comparing a Benchmark
with a Baseline or with Best Practice. The term
Benchmarking is also used to mean creating a series of
Benchmarks over time, and comparing the results to
measure progress or improvement.

Best Practice
::Proven Activities or Processes that have been successfully
used by multiple Organizations. ITIL is an example of Best
Practice.

Brainstorming
::(Service Design) A technique that helps a team to
generate ideas. Ideas are not reviewed during the
Brainstorming session, but at a later stage. Brainstorming is
often used by Problem Management to identify possible
causes.

Budget
::A list of all the money an Organization or Business Unit
plans to receive, and plans to pay out, over a specified
period of time. See also Budgeting, Planning.

Budgeting
::The Activity of predicting and controlling the spending of
money. Consists of a periodic negotiation cycle to set
future Budgets (usually annual) and the day-to-day
monitoring and adjusting of current Budgets.

Build
::(Service Transition) The Activity of assembling a number of
Configuration Items to create part of an IT Service. The
term Build is also used to refer to a Release that is
authorized for distribution. For example Server Build or
laptop Build.

Business
::(Service Strategy) An overall corporate entity or
Organization formed of a number of Business Units. In the
context of ITSM, the term Business includes public sector
and not-for-profit organizations, as well as companies. An
IT Service Provider provides IT Services to a Customer
within a Business. The IT Service Provider may be part of
the same Business as its Customer (Internal Service
Provider), or part of another Business (External Service
Provider).

Business Capacity Management (BCM)
::(Service Design) In the context of ITSM, Business Capacity
Management is the Activity responsible for understanding
future Business Requirements for use in the Capacity Plan.
See also Service Capacity Management.

Business Case
::(Service Strategy) Justification for a significant item of
expenditure. Includes information about Costs, benefits,
options, issues, Risks, and possible problems. See also Cost
Benefit Analysis.

Business Customer
::(Service Strategy) A recipient of a product or a Service
from the Business. For example, if the Business is a car
manufacturer then the Business Customer is someone who
buys a car.

Business Impact Analysis (BIA)
::(Service Strategy) BIA is the Activity in Business Continuity
Management that identifies Vital Business Functions and
their dependencies. These dependencies may include
Suppliers, people, other Business Processes, IT Services,
etc. BIA defines the recovery requirements for IT Services.
These requirements include Recovery Time Objectives,
Recovery Point Objectives and minimum Service Level
Targets for each IT Service.

Business Objective
::(Service Strategy) The Objective of a Business Process, or
of the Business as a whole. Business Objectives support
the Business Vision, provide guidance for the IT Strategy,
and are often supported by IT Services.

Business Operations
::(Service Strategy) The day-to-day execution, monitoring
and management of Business Processes.

Business Perspective
::(Continual Service Improvement) An understanding of the
Service Provider and IT Services from the point of view of
the Business, and an understanding of the Business from
the point of view of the Service Provider.

Business Process
::A Process that is owned and carried out by the Business. A
Business Process contributes to the delivery of a product
or Service to a Business Customer. For example, a retailer
may have a purchasing Process that helps to deliver
Services to its Business Customers. Many Business
Processes rely on IT Services.

Business Relationship Management
::(Service Strategy) The Process or Function responsible for
maintaining a Relationship with the Business. Business
Relationship Management usually includes:
■ Managing personal Relationships with Business
managers
■ Providing input to Service Portfolio Management
■ Ensuring that the IT Service Provider is satisfying the

Business needs of the Customers
::This Process has strong links with Service Level
Management.

Business Service
::An IT Service that directly supports a Business Process,
as opposed to an Infrastructure Service, which is used
internally by the IT Service Provider and is not usually
visible to the Business.
The term Business Service is also used to mean a Service
that is delivered to Business Customers by Business Units.
For example, delivery of financial services to Customers of
a bank, or goods to the Customers of a retail store.
Successful delivery of Business Services often depends on
one or more IT Services.

Business Service Management (BSM)
::(Service Strategy) (Service Design) An approach to the
management of IT Services that considers the Business
Processes supported and the Business value provided.
This term also means the management of Business
Services delivered to Business Customers.

Business Unit
::(Service Strategy) A segment of the Business that has its
own Plans, Metrics, income and Costs. Each Business Unit
owns Assets and uses these to create value for Customers
in the form of goods and Services.

Call
::(Service Operation) A telephone call to the Service Desk
from a User. A Call could result in an Incident or a Service
Request being logged.

Call Centre
::(Service Operation) An Organization or Business Unit that
handles large numbers of incoming and outgoing
telephone calls. See also Service Desk.

Call Type
::(Service Operation) A Category that is used to distinguish
incoming requests to a Service Desk. Common call types
are Incident, Service Request and Complaint.

Capability
::(Service Strategy) The ability of an Organization, person,
Process, Application, Configuration Item or IT Service to
carry out an Activity. Capabilities are intangible Assets of
an Organization. See also Resource.

Capacity
::(Service Design) The maximum Throughput that a
Configuration Item or IT Service can deliver whilst meeting
agreed Service Level Targets. For some types of CI,
Capacity may be the size or volume, for example a disk
drive.

Capacity Management
::(Service Design) The Process responsible for ensuring that
the Capacity of IT Services and the IT Infrastructure is able
to deliver agreed Service Level Targets in a Cost Effective
and timely manner. Capacity Management considers all
Resources required to deliver the IT Service, and plans for
short-, medium- and long-term Business Requirements.

Capacity Plan
::(Service Design) A Capacity Plan is used to manage the
Resources required to deliver IT Services. The Plan contains
scenarios for different predictions of Business demand, and
costed options to deliver the agreed Service Level Targets.

Capacity Planning
::(Service Design) The Activity within Capacity Management
responsible for creating a Capacity Plan.

Capital Expenditure (CAPEX)
::(Service Strategy) The cost of purchasing something that
will become a financial Asset, for example computer
equipment and buildings. The value of the Asset is
Depreciated over multiple accounting periods.

Category
::A named group of things that have something in
common. Categories are used to group similar things
together. For example, Cost Types are used to group
similar types of Cost. Incident Categories are used to
group similar types of Incident, CI Types are used to group
similar types of Configuration Item.

Certification
::Issuing a certificate to confirm Compliance to a Standard.
Certification includes a formal Audit by an independent
and Accredited body. The term Certification is also used to
mean awarding a certificate to verify that a person has
achieved a qualification.

Change
::(Service Transition) The addition, modification or removal
of anything that could have an effect on IT Services. The
Scope should include all IT Services, Configuration Items,
Processes, Documentation, etc.

Change Advisory Board (CAB)
::(Service Transition) A group of people that advises the
Change Manager in the Assessment, prioritization and
scheduling of Changes. This board is usually made up of
representatives from all areas within the IT Service
Provider, representatives from the Business and Third
Parties such as Suppliers.

Change Case
::(Service Operation) A technique used to predict the impact
of proposed Changes. Change Cases use specific scenarios
to clarify the scope of proposed Changes and to help with
Cost Benefit Analysis. See also Use Case.

Change Management
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for controlling
the Lifecycle of all Changes. The primary objective of
Change Management is to enable beneficial Changes to
be made, with minimum disruption to IT Services.

Change Model
::(Service Transition) A repeatable way of dealing with a
particular Category of Change. A Change Model defines
specific pre-defined steps that will be followed for a
change of this Category. Change Models may be very
simple, with no requirement for approval (e.g. Password
Reset) or may be very complex with many steps that
require approval (e.g. major software release). See also
Standard Change, Change Advisory Board.

Change Record
::(Service Transition) A Record containing the details of a
Change. Each Change Record documents the Lifecycle of a
single Change. A Change Record is created for every
Request for Change that is received, even those that are
subsequently rejected. Change Records should reference
the Configuration Items that are affected by the Change.
Change Records are stored in the Configuration
Management System.

Change Schedule
::(Service Transition) A Document that lists all approved
Changes and their planned implementation dates. A
Change Schedule is sometimes called a Forward Schedule
of Change, even though it also contains information about
Changes that have already been implemented.

Charging
::(Service Strategy) Requiring payment for IT Services.
Charging for IT Services is optional, and many
Organizations choose to treat their IT Service Provider as a
Cost Centre.

Chronological Analysis
::(Service Operation) A technique used to help identify
possible causes of Problems. All available data about the
Problem is collected and sorted by date and time to
provide a detailed timeline. This can make it possible to
identify which Events may have been triggered by others.

Classification
::The act of assigning a Category to something.
Classification is used to ensure consistent management
and reporting. CIs, Incidents, Problems, Changes, etc. are
usually classified.

Client
::A generic term that means a Customer, the Business or a
Business Customer. For example, Client Manager may be
used as a synonym for Account Manager.
The term client is also used to mean:
■ A computer that is used directly by a User, for
example a PC, Handheld Computer, or Workstation
■ The part of a Client-Server Application that the User
directly interfaces with. For example an e-mail Client.

Closed
::(Service Operation) The final Status in the Lifecycle of an
Incident, Problem, Change, etc. When the Status is Closed,
no further action is taken.

Closure
::(Service Operation) The act of changing the Status of an
Incident, Problem, Change, etc. to Closed.

COBIT
::(Continual Service Improvement) Control Objectives for
Information and related Technology (COBIT) provides
guidance and Best Practice for the management of IT
Processes. COBIT is published by the IT Governance
Institute. See www.isaca.org for more information.

Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS)
::(Service Design) Application software or Middleware that
can be purchased from a Third Party.
Compliance
Ensuring that a Standard or set of Guidelines is followed,
or that proper, consistent accounting or other practices
are being employed.

Component
::A general term that is used to mean one part of
something more complex. For example, a computer
System may be a component of an IT Service, an
Application may be a Component of a Release Unit.
Components that need to be managed should be
Configuration Items.

Component Capacity Management
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) The
Process responsible for understanding the Capacity,
Utilization, and Performance of Configuration Items. Data
is collected, recorded and analysed for use in the Capacity
Plan. See also Service Capacity Management.

Component Failure Impact Analysis (CFIA)
::(Service Design) A technique that helps to identify the
impact of CI failure on IT Services. A matrix is created with
IT Services on one edge and CIs on the other. This enables
the identification of critical CIs (that could cause the failure
of multiple IT Services) and of fragile IT Services (that have
multiple Single Points of Failure).

Computer Telephony Integration (CTI)
::(Service Operation) Computer Telephony Integration (CTI)
is a general term covering any kind of integration between
computers and telephone Systems. It is most commonly
used to refer to Systems where an Application displays
detailed screens relating to incoming or outgoing
telephone calls. See also Automatic Call Distribution,
Interactive Voice Response

Concurrency
::A measure of the number of Users engaged in the same
Operation at the same time.

Confidentiality
::(Service Design) A security principle that requires that data
should only be accessed by authorized people.

Configuration
::(Service Transition) A generic term, used to describe a
group of Configuration Items that work together to deliver
an IT Service, or a recognizable part of an IT Service.
Configuration is also used to describe the parameter
settings for one or more CIs.

Configuration Control
::(Service Transition) The Activity responsible for ensuring
that adding, modifying or removing a CI is properly
managed, for example by submitting a Request for
Change or Service Request.

Configuration Item (CI)
::(Service Transition) Any Component that needs to be
managed in order to deliver an IT Service. Information
about each CI is recorded in a Configuration Record within
the Configuration Management System and is maintained
throughout its Lifecycle by Configuration Management. CIs
are under the control of Change Management. CIs typically
include IT Services, hardware, software, buildings, people,
and formal documentation such as Process documentation
and SLAs.

Configuration Management
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for maintaining
information about Configuration Items required to deliver
an IT Service, including their Relationships. This
information is managed throughout the Lifecycle of the CI.
Configuration Management is part of an overall Service
Asset and Configuration Management Process.

Configuration Management Database (CMDB)
::(Service Transition) A database used to store Configuration
Records throughout their Lifecycle. The Configuration
Management System maintains one or more CMDBs, and
each CMDB stores Attributes of CIs, and Relationships with
other CIs.

Configuration Management System (CMS)
::(Service Transition) A set of tools and databases that are
used to manage an IT Service Provider’s Configuration
data. The CMS also includes information about Incidents,
Problems, Known Errors, Changes and Releases; and it may
contain data about employees, Suppliers, locations,
Business Units, Customers and Users. The CMS includes
tools for collecting, storing, managing, updating, and
presenting data about all Configuration Items and their
Relationships. The CMS is maintained by Configuration
Management and is used by all IT Service Management
Processes. See also Configuration Management Database,
Service Knowledge Management System.

Continual Service Improvement (CSI)
::(Continual Service Improvement) A stage in the Lifecycle
of an IT Service and the title of one of the Core ITIL
publications. Continual Service Improvement is responsible
for managing improvements to IT Service Management
Processes and IT Services. The Performance of the IT
Service Provider is continually measured and
improvements are made to Processes, IT Services and IT
Infrastructure in order to increase Efficiency, Effectiveness,
and Cost Effectiveness. See also Plan–Do–Check–Act.

Contract
::A legally binding Agreement between two or more parties.

Control
::A means of managing a Risk, ensuring that a Business
Objective is achieved, or ensuring that a Process is
followed. Example Controls include Policies, Procedures,
Roles, RAID, door locks, etc. A control is sometimes called
a Countermeasure or safeguard. Control also means to
manage the utilization or behaviour of a Configuration
Item, System or IT Service.
Control Objectives for Information and
related Technology (COBIT)
See COBIT.

Control perspective
::(Service Strategy) An approach to the management of IT
Services, Processes, Functions, Assets, etc. There can be
several different Control Perspectives on the same IT
Service, Process, etc., allowing different individuals or
teams to focus on what is important and relevant to their
specific Role. Example Control Perspectives include
Reactive and Proactive management within IT Operations,
or a Lifecycle view for an Application Project team.

Cost
::The amount of money spent on a specific Activity, IT
Service, or Business Unit. Costs consist of real cost
(money), notional cost such as people’s time, and
Depreciation.

Cost Benefit Analysis
::An Activity that analyses and compares the Costs and the
benefits involved in one or more alternative courses of
action. See also Business Case.

Cost Effectiveness
::A measure of the balance between the Effectiveness and
Cost of a Service, Process or activity, A Cost Effective
Process is one that achieves its Objectives at minimum
Cost. See also KPI, Value for Money.

Countermeasure
::Can be used to refer to any type of Control. The term
Countermeasure is most often used when referring to
measures that increase Resilience, Fault Tolerance or
Reliability of an IT Service.

Critical Success Factor (CSF)
::Something that must happen if a Process, Project, Plan, or
IT Service is to succeed. KPIs are used to measure the
achievement of each CSF. For example a CSF of ‘protect IT
Services when making Changes’ could be measured by
KPIs such as ‘percentage reduction of unsuccessful
Changes’, ‘percentage reduction in Changes causing
Incidents’, etc.

Culture
::A set of values that is shared by a group of people,
including expectations about how people should behave,
their ideas, beliefs, and practices. See also Vision.

Customer
::Someone who buys goods or Services. The Customer of an
IT Service Provider is the person or group that defines and
agrees the Service Level Targets. The term Customers is
also sometimes informally used to mean Users, for
example ‘this is a Customer-focused Organization’.

Dashboard
::(Service Operation) A graphical representation of overall IT
Service Performance and Availability. Dashboard images
may be updated in real-time, and can also be included in
management reports and web pages. Dashboards can be
used to support Service Level Management, Event
Management or Incident Diagnosis.

Definitive Media Library (DML)
::(Service Transition) One or more locations in which the
definitive and approved versions of all software
Configuration Items are securely stored. The DML may also
contain associated CIs such as licences and
documentation. The DML is a single logical storage area
even if there are multiple locations. All software in the
DML is under the control of Change and Release
Management and is recorded in the Configuration
Management System. Only software from the DML is
acceptable for use in a Release.

Deliverable
::Something that must be provided to meet a commitment
in a Service Level Agreement or a Contract. Deliverable is
also used in a more informal way to mean a planned
output of any Process.

Demand Management
::Activities that understand and influence Customer demand
for Services and the provision of Capacity to meet these
demands. At a Strategic level Demand Management can
involve analysis of Patterns of Business Activity and User
Profiles. At a tactical level it can involve use of Differential
Charging to encourage Customers to use IT Services at less
busy times. See also Capacity Management.

Dependency
::The direct or indirect reliance of one Process or Activity on
another.

Deployment
::(Service Transition) The Activity responsible for movement
of new or changed hardware, software, documentation,
Process, etc. to the Live Environment. Deployment is part
of the Release and Deployment Management Process. See
also Rollout.

Design
::(Service Design) An Activity or Process that identifies
Requirements and then defines a solution that is able to
meet these Requirements. See also Service Design.

Detection
::(Service Operation) A stage in the Incident Lifecycle.
Detection results in the Incident becoming known to the
Service Provider. Detection can be automatic, or can be
the result of a user logging an Incident.

Development
::(Service Design) The Process responsible for creating or
modifying an IT Service or Application. Also used to mean
the Role or group that carries out Development work.

Development Environment
::(Service Design) An Environment used to create or modify
IT Services or Applications. Development Environments are
not typically subjected to the same degree of control as
Test Environments or Live Environments. See also
Development.

Diagnosis
::(Service Operation) A stage in the Incident and Problem
Lifecycles. The purpose of Diagnosis is to identify a
Workaround for an Incident or the Root Cause of a
Problem.

Diagnostic Script
::(Service Operation) A structured set of questions used by
Service Desk staff to ensure they ask the correct questions,
and to help them Classify, Resolve and assign Incidents.
Diagnostic Scripts may also be made available to Users to
help them diagnose and resolve their own Incidents.

Directory Service
::(Service Operation) An Application that manages
information about IT Infrastructure available on a network,
and corresponding User access Rights.

Document
::Information in readable form. A Document may be paper
or electronic. For example, a Policy statement, Service
Level Agreement, Incident Record, diagram of computer
room layout. See also Record.

Downtime
::(Service Design) (Service Operation) The time when a
Configuration Item or IT Service is not Available during its
Agreed Service Time. The Availability of an IT Service is
often calculated from Agreed Service Time and Downtime.

Driver
::Something that influences Strategy, Objectives or
Requirements. For example, new legislation or the actions
of competitors.

Early Life Support
::(Service Transition) Support provided for a new or
Changed IT Service for a period of time after it is Released.
During Early Life Support the IT Service Provider may
review the KPIs, Service Levels and Monitoring Thresholds,
and provide additional Resources for Incident and Problem
Management.

Economies of scale
::(Service Strategy) The reduction in average Cost that is
possible from increasing the usage of an IT Service or
Asset.

Effectiveness
::(Continual Service Improvement) A measure of whether
the Objectives of a Process, Service or Activity have been
achieved. An Effective Process or activity is one that
achieves its agreed Objectives. See also KPI.

Efficiency
::(Continual Service Improvement) A measure of whether
the right amount of resources has been used to deliver a
Process, Service or Activity. An Efficient Process achieves its
Objectives with the minimum amount of time, money,
people or other resources. See also KPI.

Emergency Change
::(Service Transition) A Change that must be introduced as
soon as possible. For example, to resolve a Major Incident
or implement a Security patch. The Change Management
Process will normally have a specific Procedure for
handling Emergency Changes. See also Emergency Change
Advisory Board (ECAB).

Emergency Change Advisory Board (ECAB)
::(Service Transition) A subset of the Change Advisory Board
that makes decisions about high-impact Emergency
Changes. Membership of the ECAB may be decided at the
time a meeting is called, and depends on the nature of
the Emergency Change.

Environment
::(Service Transition) A subset of the IT Infrastructure that is
used for a particular purpose. For Example: Live
Environment, Test Environment, Build Environment. It is
possible for multiple Environments to share a
Configuration Item, for example Test and Live
Environments may use different partitions on a single
mainframe computer. Also used in the term Physical
Environment to mean the accommodation, air
conditioning, power system, etc.
Environment is also used as a generic term to mean the
external conditions that influence or affect something.

Error
::(Service Operation) A design flaw or malfunction that
causes a Failure of one or more Configuration Items or IT
Services. A mistake made by a person or a faulty Process
that affects a CI or IT Service is also an Error.

Escalation
::(Service Operation) An Activity that obtains additional
Resources when these are needed to meet Service Level
Targets or Customer expectations. Escalation may be
needed within any IT Service Management Process, but is
most commonly associated with Incident Management,
Problem Management and the management of Customer
complaints. There are two types of Escalation: Functional
Escalation and Hierarchic Escalation.
eSourcing Capability Model for Service

Providers (eSCM–SP)
::(Service Strategy) A framework to help IT Service Providers
develop their IT Service Management Capabilities from a
Service Sourcing perspective. eSCM–SP was developed by
Carnegie Mellon University, US.

Estimation
::The use of experience to provide an approximate value for
a Metric or Cost. Estimation is also used in Capacity and
Availability Management as the cheapest and least
accurate Modelling method.

Evaluation
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for assessing a
new or Changed IT Service to ensure that Risks have been
managed and to help determine whether to proceed with
the Change.
Evaluation is also used to mean comparing an actual
Outcome with the intended Outcome, or comparing one
alternative with another.

Event
::(Service Operation) A change of state that has significance
for the management of a Configuration Item or IT Service.
The term Event is also used to mean an Alert or
notification created by any IT Service, Configuration Item
or Monitoring tool. Events typically require IT Operations
personnel to take actions, and often lead to Incidents
being logged.

Event Management
::(Service Operation) The Process responsible for managing
Events throughout their Lifecycle. Event Management is
one of the main Activities of IT Operations.

Exception Report
::A Document containing details of one or more KPIs or
other important targets that have exceeded defined
Thresholds. Examples include SLA targets being missed or
about to be missed, and a Performance Metric indicating a
potential Capacity problem.

External Customer
::A Customer who works for a different Business to the IT
Service Provider. See also External Service Provider.

External Metric
::A Metric that is used to measure the delivery of IT Service
to a Customer. External Metrics are usually defined in SLAs
and reported to Customers. See also Internal Metric.

External Service Provider
::(Service Strategy) An IT Service Provider that is part of a
different Organization from its Customer. An IT Service
Provider may have both Internal Customers and External
Customers.

Facilities Management
::(Service Operation) The Function responsible for managing
the physical Environment where the IT Infrastructure is
located. Facilities Management includes all aspects of
managing the physical Environment, for example power
and cooling, building Access Management, and
environmental Monitoring.

Failure
::(Service Operation) Loss of ability to Operate to
Specification, or to deliver the required output. The term
Failure may be used when referring to IT Services,
Processes, Activities, Configuration Items, etc. A Failure
often causes an Incident.

Fault
::See Error.

Fault Tolerance
::(Service Design) The ability of an IT Service or
Configuration Item to continue to Operate correctly after
Failure of a Component part. See also Resilience,
Countermeasure.

Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) A
technique that can be used to determine the chain of
events that leads to a Problem. Fault Tree Analysis
represents a chain of events using Boolean notation in a
diagram.

Financial Management
::(Service Strategy) The Function and Processes responsible
for managing an IT Service Provider’s Budgeting,
Accounting and Charging Requirements.

First-line Support
::(Service Operation) The first level in a hierarchy of Support
Groups involved in the resolution of Incidents. Each level
contains more specialist skills, or has more time or other
resources. See also Escalation.

Fishbone Diagram
::See Ishikawa Diagram.

Fit for Purpose
::An informal term used to describe a Process, Configuration
Item, IT Service, etc. that is capable of meeting its
objectives or Service Levels. Being Fit for Purpose requires
suitable design, implementation, control and maintenance.

Follow the Sun
::(Service Operation) A methodology for using Service Desks
and Support Groups around the world to provide seamless
24/7 Service. Calls, Incidents, Problems and Service
Requests are passed between groups in different time
zones.

Fulfilment
::Performing Activities to meet a need or Requirement. For
example, by providing a new IT Service, or meeting a
Service Request.

Function
::A team or group of people and the tools they use to carry
out one or more Processes or Activities. For example the
Service Desk.
The term Function also has two other meanings:
■ An intended purpose of a Configuration Item, Person,
Team, Process, or IT Service. For example one Function
of an e-mail Service may be to store and forward
outgoing mails, one Function of a Business Process
may be to dispatch goods to Customers.
■ To perform the intended purpose correctly, ‘The
computer is Functioning’.

Functional Escalation
::(Service Operation) Transferring an Incident, Problem or
Change to a technical team with a higher level of
expertise to assist in an Escalation.

Governance
::Ensuring that Policies and Strategy are actually
implemented, and that required Processes are correctly
followed. Governance includes defining Roles and
responsibilities, measuring and reporting, and taking
actions to resolve any issues identified.

Guideline
::A Document describing Best Practice, which recommends
what should be done. Compliance with a guideline is not
normally enforced. See also Standard.

Help Desk
::(Service Operation) A point of contact for Users to log
Incidents. A Help Desk is usually more technically focussed
than a Service Desk and does not provide a Single Point of
Contact for all interaction. The term Help Desk is often
used as a synonym for Service Desk.

Hierarchic Escalation
::(Service Operation) Informing or involving more senior
levels of management to assist in an Escalation.

High Availability
::(Service Design) An approach or design that minimizes or
hides the effects of Configuration Item Failure on the users
of an IT Service. High Availability solutions are designed to
achieve an agreed level of Availability and make use of
techniques such as Fault Tolerance, Resilience and fast
Recovery to reduce the number of Incidents, and the
Impact of Incidents.

Identity
::(Service Operation) A unique name that is used to identify
a User, person or Role. The Identity is used to grant Rights
to that User, person, or Roles. Example identities might be
the username SmithJ or the Role ‘Change manager’.

Immediate Recovery
::(Service Design) A Recovery Option that is also known as
Hot Standby. Provision is made to Recover the IT Service
with no loss of Service. Immediate Recovery typically uses
Mirroring, Load Balancing and Split Site technologies.

Impact
::(Service Operation) (Service Transition) A measure of the
effect of an Incident, Problem or Change on Business
Processes. Impact is often based on how Service Levels
will be affected. Impact and Urgency are used to assign
Priority.

Incident
::(Service Operation) An unplanned interruption to an IT
Service or reduction in the Quality of an IT Service. Failure
of a Configuration Item that has not yet affected Service is
also an Incident. For example Failure of one disk from a
mirror set.

Incident Management
::(Service Operation) The Process responsible for managing
the Lifecycle of all Incidents. The primary Objective of
Incident Management is to return the IT Service to
Customers as quickly as possible.

Incident Record
::(Service Operation) A Record containing the details of an
Incident. Each Incident record documents the Lifecycle of
a single Incident.

Indirect Cost
::(Service Strategy) A Cost of providing an IT Service, which
cannot be allocated in full to a specific customer. For
example, the Cost of providing shared Servers or software
licences. Also known as Overhead.

Information Security Management (ISM)
::(Service Design) The Process that ensures the
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability of an
Organization’s Assets, information, data and IT Services.
Information Security Management usually forms part of an
Organizational approach to Security Management that has
a wider scope than the IT Service Provider, and includes
handling of paper, building access, phone calls, etc. for the
entire Organization.

Information Security Policy
::(Service Design) The Policy that governs the Organization’s
approach to Information Security Management.

Information Technology (IT)
::The use of technology for the storage, communication or
processing of information. The technology typically
includes computers, telecommunications, Applications and
other software. The information may include Business data,
voice, images, video, etc. Information Technology is often
used to support Business Processes through IT Services.

Insourcing
::See Internal Sourcing.

Integrity
::(Service Design) A security principle that ensures data and
Configuration Items are modified only by authorized
personnel and Activities. Integrity considers all possible
causes of modification, including software and hardware
Failure, environmental Events, and human intervention.

Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
::(Service Operation) A form of Automatic Call Distribution
that accepts User input, such as key presses and spoken
commands, to identify the correct destination for
incoming Calls.

Intermediate Recovery
::(Service Design) A Recovery Option that is also known as
Warm Standby. Provision is made to Recover the IT Service
in a period of time between 24 and 72 hours.
Intermediate Recovery typically uses a shared Portable or
Fixed Facility that has Computer Systems and Network
Components. The hardware and software will need to be
configured, and data will need to be restored, as part of
the IT Service Continuity Plan.

Internal Metric
::A Metric that is used within the IT Service Provider to
Monitor the Efficiency, Effectiveness or Cost Effectiveness
of the IT Service Provider’s internal Processes. Internal
Metrics are not normally reported to the Customer of the
IT Service. See also External Metric.

Internal Service Provider
::(Service Strategy) An IT Service Provider that is part of the
same Organization as its Customer. An IT Service Provider
may have both Internal Customers and External
Customers.

Internal Sourcing
::(Service Strategy) Using an Internal Service Provider to
manage IT Services.

International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
::The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is
the world’s largest developer of Standards. ISO is a nongovernmental organization that is a network of the
national standards institutes of 156 countries. See
www.iso.org for further information about ISO.

International Standards Organization
::See International Organization for Standardization (ISO).

Internet Service Provider (ISP)
::An External Service Provider that provides access to the
Internet. Most ISPs also provide other IT Services such as
web hosting.

Invocation
::(Service Design) Initiation of the steps defined in a plan.
For example initiating the IT Service Continuity Plan for
one or more IT Services.

Ishikawa Diagram
::(Service Operation) (Continual Service Improvement) A
technique that helps a team to identify all the possible
causes of a Problem. Originally devised by Kaoru Ishikawa,
the output of this technique is a diagram that looks like a
fishbone.

ISO 9000
::A generic term that refers to a number of international
Standards and Guidelines for Quality Management
Systems. See www.iso.org for more information. See also
ISO.

ISO/IEC 20000
::ISO Specification and Code of Practice for IT Service
Management. ISO/IEC 20000 is aligned with ITIL Best
Practice.

ISO/IEC 27001
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) ISO
Specification for Information Security Management. The
corresponding Code of Practice is ISO/IEC 17799. See also
Standard.

IT Infrastructure
::All of the hardware, software, networks, facilities, etc. that
are required to develop, Test, deliver, Monitor, Control or
support IT Services. The term IT Infrastructure includes all
of the Information Technology but not the associated
people, Processes and documentation.

IT Operations
::(Service Operation) Activities carried out by IT Operations
Control, including Console Management, Job Scheduling,
Backup and Restore, and Print and Output Management.
IT Operations is also used as a synonym for Service
Operation.

IT Operations Control
::(Service Operation) The Function responsible for
Monitoring and Control of the IT Services and IT
Infrastructure. See also Operations Bridge.

IT Operations Management
::(Service Operation) The Function within an IT Service
Provider that performs the daily Activities needed to
manage IT Services and the supporting IT Infrastructure.
IT Operations Management includes IT Operations Control
and Facilities Management.

IT Service
::A Service provided to one or more Customers by an IT
Service Provider. An IT Service is based on the use of
Information Technology and supports the Customer’s
Business Processes. An IT Service is made up from a
combination of people, Processes and technology and
should be defined in a Service Level Agreement.

IT Service Continuity Management (ITSCM)
::(Service Design) The Process responsible for managing
Risks that could seriously affect IT Services. ITSCM ensures
that the IT Service Provider can always provide minimum
agreed Service Levels, by reducing the Risk to an
acceptable level and Planning for the Recovery of IT
Services. ITSCM should be designed to support Business
Continuity Management.

IT Service Continuity Plan
::(Service Design) A Plan defining the steps required to
Recover one or more IT Services. The Plan will also identify
the triggers for Invocation, people to be involved,
communications, etc. The IT Service Continuity Plan should
be part of a Business Continuity Plan.

IT Service Management (ITSM)
::The implementation and management of Quality IT
Services that meet the needs of the Business. IT Service
Management are performed by IT Service Providers
through an appropriate mix of people, Process and
Information Technology. See also Service Management.

IT Service Management Forum (itSMF)
::The IT Service Management Forum is an independent
Organization dedicated to promoting a professional
approach to IT Service Management. The itSMF is a notfor-profit membership Organization with representation in
many countries around the world (itSMF Chapters). The
itSMF and its membership contribute to the development
of ITIL and associated IT Service Management Standards.
See www.itsmf.com for more information.

ITIL
::A set of Best Practice guidance for IT Service Management.
ITIL is owned by the OGC and consists of a series of
publications giving guidance on the provision of Quality IT
Services, and on the Processes and facilities needed to
support them. See www.itil.co.uk for more information.

Job Description
::A Document that defines the Roles, responsibilities, skills
and knowledge required by a particular person. One Job
Description can include multiple Roles, for example the
Roles of Configuration Manager and Change Manager may
be carried out by one person.

Job Scheduling
::(Service Operation) Planning and managing the execution
of software tasks that are required as part of an IT Service.
Job Scheduling is carried out by IT Operations
Management, and is often automated using software tools
that run batch or online tasks at specific times of the day,
week, month or year.

Kepner & Tregoe Analysis
::(Service Operation) (Continual Service Improvement) A
structured approach to Problem solving. The Problem is
analysed in terms of what, where, when and extent.
Possible causes are identified. The most probable cause is
tested. The true cause is verified.

Key Performance Indicator (KPI)
::(Service design) (Continual Service Improvement) A Metric
that is used to help manage a Process, IT Service or
Activity. Many Metrics may be measured, but only the
most important of these are defined as KPIs and used to
actively manage and report on the Process, IT Service or
Activity. KPIs should be selected to ensure that Efficiency,
Effectiveness, and Cost Effectiveness are all managed. See
also Critical Success Factor.

Knowledge Base
::(Service Transition) A logical database containing the data
used by the Service Knowledge Management System.

Knowledge Management
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for gathering,
analysing, storing and sharing knowledge and information
within an Organization. The primary purpose of
Knowledge Management is to improve Efficiency by
reducing the need to rediscover knowledge. See also
Service Knowledge Management System.

Known Error
::(Service Operation) A Problem that has a documented
Root Cause and a Workaround. Known Errors are created
and managed throughout their Lifecycle by Problem
Management. Known Errors may also be identified by
Development or Suppliers.

Known Error Database (KEDB)
::(Service Operation) A database containing all Known Error
Records. This database is created by Problem Management
and used by Incident and Problem Management. The
Known Error Database is part of the Service Knowledge
Management System.

Known Error Record
::(Service Operation) A Record containing the details of a
Known Error. Each Known Error Record documents the
Lifecycle of a Known Error, including the Status, Root
Cause and Workaround. In some implementations a
Known Error is documented using additional fields in a
Problem Record.

Lifecycle
::The various stages in the life of an IT Service,
Configuration Item, Incident, Problem, Change, etc. The
Lifecycle defines the Categories for Status and the Status
transitions that are permitted. For example:
■ The Lifecycle of an Application includes Requirements,
Design, Build, Deploy, Operate, Optimize
■ The Expanded Incident Lifecycle includes Detect,
Respond, Diagnose, Repair, Recover, Restore
■ The Lifecycle of a Server may include: Ordered,
Received, In Test, Live, Disposed, etc.

Live
::(Service Transition) Refers to an IT Service or Configuration
Item that is being used to deliver Service to a Customer.

Live Environment
::(Service Transition) A controlled Environment containing
Live Configuration Items used to deliver IT Services to
Customers.

Major Incident
::(Service Operation) The highest Category of Impact for an
Incident. A Major Incident results in significant disruption
to the Business.

Management Information
::Information that is used to support decision making by
managers. Management Information is often generated
automatically by tools supporting the various IT Service
Management Processes. Management Information often
includes the values of KPIs such as ‘Percentage of Changes
leading to Incidents’, or ‘first-time fix rate’.

Management of Risk (M_o_R)
::The OGC methodology for managing Risks. M_o_R
includes all the Activities required to identify and Control
the exposure to Risk, which may have an impact on the
achievement of an Organization’s Business Objectives. See
www.m-o-r.org for more details.

Management System
::The framework of Policy, Processes and Functions that
ensures an Organization can achieve its Objectives.

Maturity
::(Continual Service Improvement) A measure of the
Reliability, Efficiency and Effectiveness of a Process,
Function, Organization, etc. The most mature Processes
and Functions are formally aligned to Business Objectives
and Strategy, and are supported by a framework for
continual improvement.

Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF)
::(Service Design) A Metric for measuring and reporting
Reliability. MTBF is the average time that a Configuration
Item or IT Service can perform its agreed Function without
interruption. This is measured from when the CI or IT
Service starts working, until it next fails.

Mean Time To Repair (MTTR)
::The average time taken to repair a Configuration Item or
IT Service after a Failure. MTTR is measured from when the
CI or IT Service fails until it is repaired. MTTR does not
include the time required to Recover or Restore. MTTR is
sometimes incorrectly used to mean Mean Time to Restore
Service.

Mean Time to Restore Service (MTRS)
::The average time taken to restore a Configuration Item or
IT Service after a Failure. MTRS is measured from when the
CI or IT Service fails until it is fully restored and delivering
its normal functionality. See also Mean Time To Repair.

Metric
::(Continual Service Improvement) Something that is
measured and reported to help manage a Process, IT
Service or Activity. See also KPI.

Middleware
::(Service Design) Software that connects two or more
software Components or Applications. Middleware is
usually purchased from a Supplier, rather than developed
within the IT Service Provider. See also Off the Shelf.

Model
::A representation of a System, Process, IT Service,
Configuration Item, etc. that is used to help understand or
predict future behaviour.

Modelling
::A technique that is used to predict the future behaviour of
a System, Process, IT Service, Configuration Item, etc.
Modelling is commonly used in Financial Management,
Capacity Management and Availability Management.

Monitor Control Loop
::(Service Operation) Monitoring the output of a Task,
Process, IT Service or Configuration Item; comparing this
output to a predefined Norm; and taking appropriate
action based on this comparison.

Monitoring
::(Service Operation) Repeated observation of a
Configuration Item, IT Service or Process to detect Events
and to ensure that the current status is known.

Objective
::The defined purpose or aim of a Process, an Activity or an
Organization as a whole. Objectives are usually expressed
as measurable targets. The term Objective is also
informally used to mean a Requirement. See also

Outcome.
::Off the Shelf
See Commercial Off the Shelf.

Office of Government Commerce (OGC)
::OGC owns the ITIL brand (copyright and trademark). OGC
is a UK Government department that supports the delivery
of the government’s procurement agenda through its
work in collaborative procurement and in raising levels of
procurement skills and capability with departments. It also
provides support for complex public sector projects.

Off-shore
::(Service Strategy) Provision of Services from a location
outside the country where the Customer is based, often in
a different continent. This can be the provision of an IT
Service, or of supporting Functions such as Service Desk.

Operate
::To perform as expected. A Process or Configuration Item is
said to Operate if it is delivering the Required outputs.
Operate also means to perform one or more Operations.
For example, to Operate a computer is to do the day-today Operations needed for it to perform as expected.

Operation
::(Service Operation) Day-to-day management of an IT
Service, System, or other Configuration Item. Operation is
also used to mean any pre-defined Activity or Transaction.
For example loading a magnetic tape, accepting money at
a point of sale, or reading data from a disk drive.

Operational
::The lowest of three levels of Planning and delivery
(Strategic, Tactical, Operational). Operational Activities
include the day-to-day or short-term Planning or delivery
of a Business Process or IT Service Management Process.
The term Operational is also a synonym for Live.

Operational Cost
::Cost resulting from running the IT Services. Often
repeating payments. For example staff costs, hardware
maintenance and electricity (also known as ‘current
expenditure’ or ‘revenue expenditure’). See also Capital
Expenditure.

Operational Expenditure (OPEX)
::See Operational Cost.

Operational Level Agreement (OLA)
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) An
Agreement between an IT Service Provider and another
part of the same Organization. An OLA supports the IT
Service Provider’s delivery of IT Services to Customers. The
OLA defines the goods or Services to be provided and the
responsibilities of both parties. For example there could be
an OLA:
■ Between the IT Service Provider and a procurement
department to obtain hardware in agreed times
■ Between the Service Desk and a Support Group to
provide Incident Resolution in agreed times.
See also Service Level Agreement.

Operations Bridge
::(Service Operation) A physical location where IT Services
and IT Infrastructure are monitored and managed.

Operations Control
::See IT Operations Control.

Operations Management
::See IT Operations Management.

Optimize
::Review, Plan and request Changes, in order to obtain the
maximum Efficiency and Effectiveness from a Process,
Configuration Item, Application, etc.

Organization
::A company, legal entity or other institution. Examples of
Organizations that are not companies include International
Standards Organization or itSMF. The term Organization is
sometimes used to refer to any entity that has People,
Resources and Budgets. For example a Project or Business
Unit.

Outcome
::The result of carrying out an Activity; following a Process;
delivering an IT Service, etc. The term Outcome is used to
refer to intended results, as well as to actual results. See
also Objective.

Outsourcing
::(Service Strategy) Using an External Service Provider to
manage IT Services. See also Service Sourcing.

Overhead
::See Indirect cost.

Pain Value Analysis
::(Service Operation) A technique used to help identify the
Business Impact of one or more Problems. A formula is
used to calculate Pain Value based on the number of
Users affected, the duration of the Downtime, the Impact
on each User, and the cost to the Business (if known).

Partnership
::A relationship between two Organizations that involves
working closely together for common goals or mutual
benefit. The IT Service Provider should have a Partnership
with the Business, and with Third Parties who are critical
to the delivery of IT Services. See also Value Network.

Passive Monitoring
::(Service Operation) Monitoring of a Configuration Item, an
IT Service or a Process that relies on an Alert or notification
to discover the current status. See also Active Monitoring.

Performance
::A measure of what is achieved or delivered by a System,
person, team, Process, or IT Service.

Performance Management
::(Continual Service Improvement) The Process responsible
for day-to-day Capacity Management Activities. These
include monitoring, threshold detection, Performance
analysis and Tuning, and implementing changes related to
Performance and Capacity.

Pilot
::(Service Transition) A limited Deployment of an IT Service,
a Release or a Process to the Live Environment. A pilot is
used to reduce Risk and to gain User feedback and
Acceptance. See also Test, Evaluation.

Plan
::A detailed proposal that describes the Activities and
Resources needed to achieve an Objective. For example a
Plan to implement a new IT Service or Process. ISO/IEC
20000 requires a Plan for the management of each IT
Service Management Process.

Plan–Do–Check–Act
::(Continual Service Improvement) A four-stage cycle for
Process management, attributed to Edward Deming.
Plan–Do–Check–Act is also called the Deming Cycle.
PLAN: Design or revise Processes that support the IT
Services.
DO: Implement the Plan and manage the Processes.
CHECK: Measure the Processes and IT Services, compare
with Objectives and produce reports.
ACT: Plan and implement Changes to improve the
Processes.

Planned Downtime
::(Service Design) Agreed time when an IT Service will not
be available. Planned Downtime is often used for
maintenance, upgrades and testing. See also Downtime.

Planning
::An Activity responsible for creating one or more Plans. For
example, Capacity Planning.

Policy
::Formally documented management expectations and
intentions. Policies are used to direct decisions, and to
ensure consistent and appropriate development and
implementation of Processes, Standards, Roles, Activities, IT
Infrastructure, etc.

Practice
::A way of working, or a way in which work must be done.
Practices can include Activities, Processes, Functions,
Standards and Guidelines. See also Best Practice.

PRINCE2
::The standard UK government methodology for Project
management. See www.ogc.gov.uk/prince2 for more
information.

Priority
::(Service Transition) (Service Operation) A Category used to
identify the relative importance of an Incident, Problem or
Change. Priority is based on Impact and Urgency, and is
used to identify required times for actions to be taken. For
example the SLA may state that Priority 2 Incidents must
be resolved within 12 hours.

Proactive Monitoring
::(Service Operation) Monitoring that looks for patterns of
Events to predict possible future Failures. See also Reactive
Monitoring.

Proactive Problem Management
::(Service Operation) Part of the Problem Management
Process. The Objective of Proactive Problem Management
is to identify Problems that might otherwise be missed.
Proactive Problem Management analyses Incident Records,
and uses data collected by other IT Service Management
Processes to identify trends or significant problems.

Problem
::(Service Operation) A cause of one or more Incidents. The
cause is not usually known at the time a Problem Record
is created, and the Problem Management Process is
responsible for further investigation.

Problem Management
::(Service Operation) The Process responsible for managing
the Lifecycle of all Problems. The primary objectives of
Problem Management are to prevent Incidents from
happening, and to minimize the Impact of Incidents that
cannot be prevented.

Problem Record
::(Service Operation) A Record containing the details of a
Problem. Each Problem Record documents the Lifecycle of
a single Problem.

Procedure
::A Document containing steps that specify how to achieve
an Activity. Procedures are defined as part of Processes.
See also Work Instruction.

Process
::A structured set of Activities designed to accomplish a
specific Objective. A Process takes one or more defined
inputs and turns them into defined outputs. A Process
may include any of the Roles, responsibilities, tools and
management Controls required to reliably deliver the
outputs. A Process may define Policies, Standards,
Guidelines, Activities, and Work Instructions if they are
needed.

Process Control
::The Activity of planning and regulating a Process, with the
Objective of performing the Process in an Effective,
Efficient, and consistent manner.

Process Manager
::A Role responsible for Operational management of a
Process. The Process Manager’s responsibilities include
Planning and coordination of all Activities required to carry
out, monitor and report on the Process. There may be
several Process Managers for one Process, for example
regional Change Managers or IT Service Continuity
Managers for each data centre. The Process Manager Role
is often assigned to the person who carries out the
Process Owner Role, but the two Roles may be separate in
larger Organizations.

Process Owner
::A Role responsible for ensuring that a Process is Fit for
Purpose. The Process Owner’s responsibilities include
sponsorship, Design, Change Management and continual
improvement of the Process and its Metrics. This Role is
often assigned to the same person who carries out the
Process Manager Role, but the two Roles may be separate
in larger Organizations.

Production Environment
::See Live Environment.

Programme
::A number of Projects and Activities that are planned and
managed together to achieve an overall set of related
Objectives and other Outcomes.

Project
::A temporary Organization, with people and other Assets
required to achieve an Objective or other Outcome. Each
Project has a Lifecycle that typically includes initiation,
Planning, execution, Closure, etc. Projects are usually
managed using a formal methodology such as PRINCE2.

Qualification
::(Service Transition) An Activity that ensures that IT
Infrastructure is appropriate, and correctly configured, to
support an Application or IT Service. See also Validation.

Quality
::The ability of a product, Service, or Process to provide the
intended value. For example, a hardware Component can
be considered to be of high Quality if it performs as
expected and delivers the required Reliability. Process
Quality also requires an ability to monitor Effectiveness
and Efficiency, and to improve them if necessary. See also
Quality Management System.

Quality Assurance (QA)
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for ensuring
that the Quality of a product, Service or Process will
provide its intended Value.

Quality Management System (QMS)
::(Continual Service Improvement) The set of Processes
responsible for ensuring that all work carried out by an
Organization is of a suitable Quality to reliably meet
Business Objectives or Service Levels. See also ISO 9000.

Reactive Monitoring
::(Service Operation) Monitoring that takes action in
response to an Event. For example submitting a batch job
when the previous job completes, or logging an Incident
when an Error occurs. See also Proactive Monitoring.

Record
::A Document containing the results or other output from a
Process or Activity. Records are evidence of the fact that
an activity took place and may be paper or electronic. For
example, an Audit report, an Incident Record, or the
minutes of a meeting.

Recovery
::(Service Design) (Service Operation) Returning a
Configuration Item or an IT Service to a working state.
Recovery of an IT Service often includes recovering data to
a known consistent state. After Recovery, further steps may
be needed before the IT Service can be made available to
the Users (Restoration).

Recovery Option
::(Service Design) A Strategy for responding to an
interruption to Service. Commonly used Strategies are Do
Nothing, Manual Workaround, Reciprocal Arrangement,
Gradual Recovery, Intermediate Recovery, Fast Recovery,
Immediate Recovery. Recovery Options may make use of
dedicated facilities, or Third Party facilities shared by
multiple Businesses.

Recovery Point Objective (RPO)
::(Service Operation) The maximum amount of data that
may be lost when Service is Restored after an interruption.
Recovery Point Objective is expressed as a length of time
before the Failure. For example a Recovery Point Objective
of one day may be supported by daily Backups, and up to
24 hours of data may be lost. Recovery Point Objectives
for each IT Service should be negotiated, agreed and
documented, and used as requirements for Service Design
and IT Service Continuity Plans.

Recovery Time Objective (RTO)
::(Service Operation) The maximum time allowed for
recovery of an IT Service following an interruption. The
Service Level to be provided may be less than normal
Service Level Targets. Recovery Time Objectives for each IT
Service should be negotiated, agreed and documented.
See also Business Impact Analysis.

Redundancy
::See Fault Tolerance.
The term Redundant also has a generic meaning of
obsolete, or no longer needed.

Relationship
::A connection or interaction between two people or things.
In Business Relationship Management it is the interaction
between the IT Service Provider and the Business. In
Configuration Management it is a link between two
Configuration Items that identifies a dependency or
connection between them. For example Applications may
be linked to the Servers they run on, IT Services have
many links to all the CIs that contribute to them.

Release
::(Service Transition) A collection of hardware, software,
documentation, Processes or other Components required
to implement one or more approved Changes to IT
Services. The contents of each Release are managed,
tested, and deployed as a single entity.

Release and Deployment Management
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for both
Release Management and Deployment.

Release Management
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for Planning,
scheduling and controlling the movement of Releases to
Test and Live Environments. The primary Objective of
Release Management is to ensure that the integrity of the
Live Environment is protected and that the correct
Components are released. Release Management is part of
the Release and Deployment Management Process.

Release Process
::The name used by ISO/IEC 20000 for the Process group
that includes Release Management. This group does not
include any other Processes.
Release Process is also used as a synonym for Release
Management Process.

Release Record
::(Service Transition) A Record in the CMDB that defines the
content of a Release. A Release Record has Relationships
with all Configuration Items that are affected by the
Release.

Reliability
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) A
measure of how long a Configuration Item or IT Service
can perform its agreed Function without interruption.
Usually measured as MTBF or MTBSI. The term Reliability
can also be used to state how likely it is that a Process,
Function, etc. will deliver its required outputs. See also
Availability.

Remediation
::(Service Transition) Recovery to a known state after a failed
Change or Release.

Repair
::(Service Operation) The replacement or correction of a
failed Configuration Item.

Request for Change (RFC)
::(Service Transition) A formal proposal for a Change to be
made. An RFC includes details of the proposed Change,
and may be recorded on paper or electronically. The term
RFC is often misused to mean a Change Record, or the
Change itself.

Request Fulfilment
::(Service Operation) The Process responsible for managing
the Lifecycle of all Service Requests.

Requirement
::(Service Design) A formal statement of what is needed.
For example, a Service Level Requirement, a Project
Requirement or the required Deliverables for a Process.
See also Statement of Requirements.

Resilience
::(Service Design) The ability of a Configuration Item or IT
Service to resist Failure or to Recover quickly following a
Failure. For example an armoured cable will resist failure
when put under stress. See also Fault Tolerance.

Resolution
::(Service Operation) Action taken to repair the Root Cause
of an Incident or Problem, or to implement a Workaround.
In ISO/IEC 20000, Resolution Processes is the Process
group that includes Incident and Problem Management.

Resource
::(Service Strategy) A generic term that includes IT
Infrastructure, people, money or anything else that might
help to deliver an IT Service. Resources are considered to
be Assets of an Organization. See also Capability, Service
Asset.

Response Time
::A measure of the time taken to complete an Operation or
Transaction. Used in Capacity Management as a measure
of IT Infrastructure Performance, and in Incident
Management as a measure of the time taken to answer
the phone, or to start Diagnosis.

Responsiveness
::A measurement of the time taken to respond to
something. This could be Response Time of a Transaction,
or the speed with which an IT Service Provider responds
to an Incident or Request for Change, etc.

Restoration of Service
::See Restore.

Restore
::(Service Operation) Taking action to return an IT Service to
the Users after Repair and Recovery from an Incident. This
is the primary Objective of Incident Management.

Retire
::(Service Transition) Permanent removal of an IT Service,
or other Configuration Item, from the Live Environment.
Retired is a stage in the Lifecycle of many Configuration
Items.

Review
::An evaluation of a Change, Problem, Process, Project, etc.
Reviews are typically carried out at predefined points in
the Lifecycle, and especially after Closure. The purpose of
a Review is to ensure that all Deliverables have been
provided, and to identify opportunities for improvement.

Rights
::(Service Operation) Entitlements, or permissions, granted
to a User or Role. For example the Right to modify
particular data, or to authorize a Change.

Risk
::A possible event that could cause harm or loss, or affect
the ability to achieve Objectives. A Risk is measured by the
probability of a Threat, the Vulnerability of the Asset to
that Threat, and the Impact it would have if it occurred.

Risk Assessment
::The initial steps of Risk Management. Analysing the value
of Assets to the business, identifying Threats to those
Assets, and evaluating how Vulnerable each Asset is to
those Threats. Risk Assessment can be quantitative (based
on numerical data) or qualitative.

Risk Management
::The Process responsible for identifying, assessing and
controlling Risks. See also Risk Assessment.

Role
::A set of responsibilities, Activities and authorities granted
to a person or team. A Role is defined in a Process. One
person or team may have multiple Roles; for example, the
Roles of Configuration Manager and Change Manager may
be carried out by a single person.

Rollout
::(Service Transition) See Deployment.
Most often used to refer to complex or phased
Deployments or Deployments to multiple locations.

Root Cause
::(Service Operation) The underlying or original cause of an
Incident or Problem.

Root Cause Analysis (RCA)
::(Service Operation) An Activity that identifies the Root
Cause of an Incident or Problem. RCA typically
concentrates on IT Infrastructure failures. See also Service
Failure Analysis.

Scalability
::The ability of an IT Service, Process, Configuration Item,
etc. to perform its agreed Function when the Workload
or Scope changes.

Scope
::The boundary, or extent, to which a Process, Procedure,
Certification, Contract, etc. applies. For example the Scope
of Change Management may include all Live IT Services
and related Configuration Items, the Scope of an ISO/IEC
20000 Certificate may include all IT Services delivered out
of a named data centre.

Second-line Support
::(Service Operation) The second level in a hierarchy
of Support Groups involved in the resolution of Incidents
and investigation of Problems. Each level contains more
specialist skills, or has more time or other resources.

Security
::See Information Security Management.

Security Management
::See Information Security Management.

Security Policy
::See Information Security Policy.

Server
::(Service Operation) A computer that is connected to a
network and provides software Functions that are used by
other Computers.

Service
::A means of delivering value to Customers by facilitating
Outcomes Customers want to achieve without the
ownership of specific Costs and Risks.

Service Asset
::Any Capability or Resource of a Service Provider. See also
Asset.

Service Asset and Configuration Management (SACM)
::(Service Transition) The Process responsible for both
Configuration Management and Asset Management.

Service Capacity Management (SCM)
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) The
Activity responsible for understanding the Performance
and Capacity of IT Services. The Resources used by each IT
Service and the pattern of usage over time are collected,
recorded, and analysed for use in the Capacity Plan. See
also Business Capacity Management, Component Capacity
Management.

Service Catalogue
::(Service Design) A database or structured Document with
information about all Live IT Services, including those
available for Deployment. The Service Catalogue is the
only part of the Service Portfolio published to Customers,
and is used to support the sale and delivery of IT Services.
The Service Catalogue includes information about
deliverables, prices, contact points, ordering and request
Processes.

Service Continuity Management
::See IT Service Continuity Management.

Service Culture
::A Customer-oriented Culture. The major Objectives of a
Service Culture are Customer satisfaction and helping
Customers to achieve their Business Objectives.

Service Design
::(Service Design) A stage in the Lifecycle of an IT Service.
Service Design includes a number of Processes and
Functions and is the title of one of the Core ITIL
publications. See also Design.

Service Desk
::(Service Operation) The Single Point of Contact between
the Service Provider and the Users. A typical Service Desk
manages Incidents and Service Requests, and also handles
communication with the Users.

Service Failure Analysis (SFA)
::(Service Design) An Activity that identifies underlying
causes of one or more IT Service interruptions. SFA
identifies opportunities to improve the IT Service Provider’s
Processes and tools, and not just the IT Infrastructure. SFA
is a time-constrained, project-like activity, rather than an
ongoing process of analysis. See also Root Cause Analysis.

Service Hours
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) An
agreed time period when a particular IT Service should be
Available. For example, ‘Monday–Friday 08:00 to 17:00
except public holidays’. Service Hours should be defined in
a Service Level Agreement.

Service Improvement Plan (SIP)
::(Continual Service Improvement) A formal Plan to
implement improvements to a Process or IT Service.

Service Knowledge Management System (SKMS)
::(Service Transition) A set of tools and databases that are
used to manage knowledge and information. The SKMS
includes the Configuration Management System, as well
as other tools and databases. The SKMS stores, manages,
updates, and presents all information that an IT Service
Provider needs to manage the full Lifecycle of IT Services.

Service Level
::Measured and reported achievement against one or more
Service Level Targets. The term Service Level is sometimes
used informally to mean Service Level Target.

Service Level Agreement (SLA)
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) An
Agreement between an IT Service Provider and a
Customer. The SLA describes the IT Service, documents
Service Level Targets, and specifies the responsibilities of
the IT Service Provider and the Customer. A single SLA
may cover multiple IT Services or multiple customers. See
also Operational Level Agreement.

Service Level Management (SLM)
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) The
Process responsible for negotiating Service Level
Agreements, and ensuring that these are met. SLM is
responsible for ensuring that all IT Service Management
Processes, Operational Level Agreements, and
Underpinning Contracts, are appropriate for the agreed
Service Level Targets. SLM monitors and reports on Service
Levels, and holds regular Customer reviews.

Service Level Requirement (SLR)
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement)
A Customer Requirement for an aspect of an IT Service.
SLRs are based on Business Objectives and are used to
negotiate agreed Service Level Targets.

Service Level Target
::(Service Design) (Continual Service Improvement) A
commitment that is documented in a Service Level
Agreement. Service Level Targets are based on Service
Level Requirements, and are needed to ensure that the IT
Service design is Fit for Purpose. Service Level Targets
should be SMART, and are usually based on KPIs.

Service Maintenance Objective
::(Service Operation) The expected time that a Configuration
Item will be unavailable due to planned maintenance
Activity.

Service Management
::Service Management is a set of specialized organizational
capabilities for providing value to customers in the form of
services.

Service Management Lifecycle
::An approach to IT Service Management that emphasizes
the importance of coordination and Control across the
various Functions, Processes, and Systems necessary to
manage the full Lifecycle of IT Services. The Service
Management Lifecycle approach considers the Strategy,
Design, Transition, Operation and Continuous
Improvement of IT Services.

Service Manager
::A manager who is responsible for managing the end-toend Lifecycle of one or more IT Services. The term Service
Manager is also used to mean any manager within the IT
Service Provider. It is most commonly used to refer to a
Business Relationship Manager, a Process Manager, an
Account Manager or a senior manager with responsibility
for IT Services overall.

Service Operation
::(Service Operation) A stage in the Lifecycle of an IT
Service. Service Operation includes a number of Processes
and Functions and is the title of one of the Core ITIL
publications. See also Operation.

Service Portfolio
::(Service Strategy) The complete set of Services that are
managed by a Service Provider. The Service Portfolio is
used to manage the entire Lifecycle of all Services, and
includes three Categories: Service Pipeline (proposed or
in Development); Service Catalogue (Live or available for
Deployment); and Retired Services. See also Service
Portfolio Management.

Service Portfolio Management (SPM)
::(Service Strategy) The Process responsible for managing
the Service Portfolio. Service Portfolio Management
considers Services in terms of the Business value that they
provide.

Service Provider
::(Service Strategy) An Organization supplying Services to
one or more Internal Customers or External Customers.
Service Provider is often used as an abbreviation for IT
Service Provider.

Service Reporting
::(Continual Service Improvement) The Process responsible
for producing and delivering reports of achievement and
trends against Service Levels. Service Reporting should
agree the format, content and frequency of reports with
Customers.

Service Request
::(Service Operation) A request from a User for information,
or advice, or for a Standard Change or for Access to an IT
Service. For example to reset a password, or to provide
standard IT Services for a new User. Service Requests are
usually handled by a Service Desk, and do not require an
RFC to be submitted. See also Request Fulfilment.

Service Strategy
::(Service Strategy) The title of one of the Core ITIL
publications. Service Strategy establishes an overall
Strategy for IT Services and for IT Service Management.

Service Transition
::(Service Transition) A stage in the Lifecycle of an IT Service.
Service Transition includes a number of Processes and
Functions and is the title of one of the Core ITIL
publications. See also Transition.

Shift
::(Service Operation) A group or team of people who carry
out a specific Role for a fixed period of time. For example
there could be four shifts of IT Operations Control
personnel to support an IT Service that is used 24 hours
a day.

Single Point of Contact
::(Service Operation) Providing a single consistent way to
communicate with an Organization or Business Unit. For
example, a Single Point of Contact for an IT Service
Provider is usually called a Service Desk.

Single Point of Failure (SPOF)
::(Service Design) Any Configuration Item that can cause an
Incident when it fails, and for which a Countermeasure has
not been implemented. A SPOF may be a person, or a
step in a Process or Activity, as well as a Component of
the IT Infrastructure. See also Failure.

Specification
::A formal definition of Requirements. A Specification may
be used to define technical or Operational Requirements,
and may be internal or external. Many public Standards
consist of a Code of Practice and a Specification. The
Specification defines the Standard against which an
Organization can be Audited.

Stakeholder
::All people who have an interest in an Organization,
Project, IT Service, etc. Stakeholders may be interested in
the Activities, targets, Resources, or Deliverables.
Stakeholders may include Customers, Partners, employees,
shareholders, owners, etc.

Standard
::A mandatory Requirement. Examples include ISO/IEC
20000 (an international Standard), an internal security
standard for Unix configuration, or a government standard
for how financial Records should be maintained. The term
Standard is also used to refer to a Code of Practice or
Specification published by a Standards Organization such
as ISO or BSI. See also Guideline.

Standard Change
::(Service Transition) A pre-approved Change that is low
Risk, relatively common and follows a Procedure or Work
Instruction. For example, password reset or provision of
standard equipment to a new employee. RFCs are not
required to implement a Standard Change, and they are
logged and tracked using a different mechanism, such as
a Service Request. See also Change Model.

Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)
::(Service Operation) Procedures used by IT Operations
Management.

Standby
::(Service Design) Used to refer to Resources that are not
required to deliver the Live IT Services, but are available to
support IT Service Continuity Plans. For example a Standby
data centre may be maintained to support Hot Standby,
Warm Standby or Cold Standby arrangements.

Statement of requirements (SOR)
::(Service Design) A Document containing all Requirements
for a product purchase, or a new or changed IT Service.

Status
::The name of a required field in many types of Record. It
shows the current stage in the Lifecycle of the associated
Configuration Item, Incident, Problem, etc.

Storage Management
::(Service Operation) The Process responsible for managing
the storage and maintenance of data throughout its
Lifecycle.

Strategic
::(Service Strategy) The highest of three levels of Planning
and delivery (Strategic, Tactical, Operational). Strategic
Activities include Objective setting and long-term Planning
to achieve the overall Vision.

Strategy
::(Service Strategy) A Strategic Plan designed to achieve
defined Objectives.

Super User
::(Service Operation) A User who helps other Users, and
assists in communication with the Service Desk or other
parts of the IT Service Provider. Super Users typically
provide support for minor Incidents and training.

Supplier
::(Service Strategy) (Service Design) A Third Party
responsible for supplying goods or Services that are
required to deliver IT Services. Examples of suppliers
include commodity hardware and software vendors,
network and telecom providers, and outsourcing
Organizations. See also Underpinning Contract, Supply
Chain.

Supplier Management
::(Service Design) The Process responsible for ensuring that
all Contracts with Suppliers support the needs of the
Business, and that all Suppliers meet their contractual
commitments.

Supply Chain
::(Service Strategy) The Activities in a Value Chain carried
out by Suppliers. A Supply Chain typically involves
multiple Suppliers, each adding value to the product or
Service. See also Value Network.

Support Group
::(Service Operation) A group of people with technical skills.
Support Groups provide the Technical Support needed by
all of the IT Service Management Processes. See also
Technical Management.

System
::A number of related things that work together to achieve
an overall Objective. For example:
■ A computer System, including hardware, software and
Applications
■ A management System, including multiple Processes
that are planned and managed together. For example,
a Quality Management System
■ A Database Management System or Operating System
that includes many software modules that are
designed to perform a set of related Functions.

System Management
::The part of IT Service Management that focuses on the
management of IT Infrastructure rather than Process.

Tactical
::The middle of three levels of Planning and delivery
(Strategic, Tactical, Operational). Tactical Activities include
the medium-term Plans required to achieve specific
Objectives, typically over a period of weeks to months.

Technical Management
::(Service Operation) The Function responsible for providing
technical skills in support of IT Services and management
of the IT Infrastructure. Technical Management defines the
Roles of Support Groups, as well as the tools, Processes
and Procedures required.

Technical Observation
::(Continual Service Improvement) A technique used in
Service Improvement, Problem investigation and
Availability Management. Technical support staff meet to
monitor the behaviour and Performance of an IT Service
and make recommendations for improvement.

Technical Support
::See Technical Management.

Test
::(Service Transition) An Activity that verifies that a
Configuration Item, IT Service, Process, etc. meets its
Specification or agreed Requirements.

Test Environment
::(Service Transition) A controlled Environment used to Test
Configuration Items, Builds, IT Services, Processes, etc.

Third Party
::A person, group, or Business that is not part of the Service
Level Agreement for an IT Service, but is required to
ensure successful delivery of that IT Service. For example, a
software Supplier, a hardware maintenance company, or a
facilities department. Requirements for Third Parties are
typically specified in Underpinning Contracts or
Operational Level Agreements.

Third-line Support
::(Service Operation) The third level in a hierarchy of
Support Groups involved in the resolution of Incidents and
investigation of Problems. Each level contains more
specialist skills, or has more time or other resources.

Threat
::Anything that might exploit a Vulnerability. Any potential
cause of an Incident can be considered to be a Threat. For
example a fire is a Threat that could exploit the
Vulnerability of flammable floor coverings. This term is
commonly used in Information Security Management and
IT Service Continuity Management, but also applies to
other areas such as Problem and Availability Management.

Threshold
::The value of a Metric that should cause an Alert to be
generated, or management action to be taken. For
example ‘Priority 1 Incident not solved within four hours’,
‘more than five soft disk errors in an hour’, or ‘more than
10 failed changes in a month’.

Throughput
::(Service Design) A measure of the number of Transactions,
or other Operations, performed in a fixed time. For
example, 5,000 e-mails sent per hour, or 200 disk I/Os
per second.

Total Quality Management (TQM)
::(Continual Service Improvement) A methodology for
managing continual Improvement by using a Quality
Management System. TQM establishes a Culture involving
all people in the Organization in a Process of continual
monitoring and improvement.

Transaction
::A discrete Function performed by an IT Service. For
example transferring money from one bank account to
another. A single Transaction may involve numerous
additions, deletions and modifications of data. Either all of
these complete successfully or none of them is carried out.

Transition
::(Service Transition) A change in state, corresponding to a
movement of an IT Service or other Configuration Item
from one Lifecycle status to the next.

Trend Analysis
::(Continual Service Improvement) Analysis of data to
identify time-related patterns. Trend Analysis is used in
Problem Management to identify common Failures or
fragile Configuration Items, and in Capacity Management
as a Modelling tool to predict future behaviour. It is also
used as a management tool for identifying deficiencies in
IT Service Management Processes.

Tuning
::The Activity responsible for Planning changes to make the
most efficient use of Resources. Tuning is part of
Performance Management, which also includes
Performance monitoring and implementation of the
required Changes.

Underpinning Contract (UC)
::(Service Design) A Contract between an IT Service Provider
and a Third Party. The Third Party provides goods or
Services that support delivery of an IT Service to a
Customer. The Underpinning Contract defines targets and
responsibilities that are required to meet agreed Service
Level Targets in an SLA.

Unit Cost
::(Service Strategy) The Cost to the IT Service Provider
of providing a single Component of an IT Service. For
example the Cost of a single desktop PC, or of a single
Transaction.

Urgency
::(Service Transition) (Service Design) A measure of how
long it will be until an Incident, Problem or Change has a
significant Impact on the Business. For example a high
Impact Incident may have low Urgency, if the Impact will
not affect the Business until the end of the financial year.
Impact and Urgency are used to assign Priority.

Usability
::(Service Design) The ease with which an Application,
product, or IT Service can be used. Usability Requirements
are often included in a Statement of Requirements.

Use Case
::(Service Design) A technique used to define required
functionality and Objectives, and to design Tests. Use
Cases define realistic scenarios that describe interactions
between Users and an IT Service or other System. See also
Change Case.

User
::A person who uses the IT Service on a day-to-day basis.
Users are distinct from Customers, as some Customers do
not use the IT Service directly.

User Profile (UP)
::(Service Strategy) A pattern of User demand for IT Services.
Each User Profile includes one or more Patterns of
Business Activity.

Utility
::(Service Strategy) Functionality offered by a Product or
Service to meet a particular need. Utility is often
summarized as ‘what it does’.

Validation
::(Service Transition) An Activity that ensures a new or
changed IT Service, Process, Plan, or other Deliverable
meets the needs of the Business. Validation ensures that
Business Requirements are met even though these may
have changed since the original design. See also
Verification, Acceptance, Qualification.

Value for Money
::An informal measure of Cost Effectiveness. Value for
Money is often based on a comparison with the Cost of
alternatives. See also Cost Benefit Analysis.

Value Network
::(Service Strategy) A complex set of relationships between
two or more groups or Organizations. Value is generated
through exchange of knowledge, information, goods or
Services. See also Partnership.

Variance
::The difference between a planned value and the actual
measured value. Commonly used in Financial
Management, Capacity Management and Service Level
Management, but could apply in any area where Plans
are in place.

Verification
::(Service Transition) An Activity that ensures a new or
changed IT Service, Process, Plan, or other Deliverable
is complete, accurate, Reliable and matches its design
specification. See also Validation, Acceptance.

Version
::(Service Transition) A Version is used to identify a specific
Baseline of a Configuration Item. Versions typically use a
naming convention that enables the sequence or date of
each Baseline to be identified. For example Payroll
Application Version 3 contains updated functionality from
Version 2.

Vision
::A description of what the Organization intends to become
in the future. A Vision is created by senior management
and is used to help influence Culture and Strategic
Planning.

Vital Business Function (VBF)
::(Service Design) A Function of a Business Process that is
critical to the success of the Business. Vital Business
Functions are an important consideration of Business
Continuity Management, IT Service Continuity
Management and Availability Management.

Work in Progress (WIP)
::A Status that means Activities have started but are not yet
complete. It is commonly used as a Status for Incidents,
Problems, Changes, etc.

Work Instruction
::A Document containing detailed instructions that specify
exactly what steps to follow to carry out an Activity.
A Work Instruction contains much more detail than a
Procedure and is only created if very detailed instructions
are needed.

Workaround
::(Service Operation) Reducing or eliminating the Impact
of an Incident or Problem for which a full Resolution is
not yet available. For example by restarting a failed
Configuration Item. Workarounds for Problems are
documented in Known Error Records. Workarounds for
Incidents that do not have associated Problem Records
are documented in the Incident Record.

Workload
::The Resources required to deliver an identifiable part of
an IT Service. Workloads may be Categorized by Users,
groups of Users, or Functions within the IT Service. This is
used to assist in analysing and managing the Capacity,
Performance and Utilization of Configuration Items and
IT Services. The term Workload is sometimes used as
a synonym for Throughput.